---
knit: "bookdown::render_book"
title: "Sustainable Energy Without The Hot Air"
date: "12 May 2017"
output: html_document
site: bookdown::bookdown_site
documentclass: book
---

to those who will not have the benefit of two billion years' accumulated
energy reserves

1   Motivations {.lightblue}
===============

> We live at a time when emotions and feelings count more than truth,
> and there is a vast ignorance of science.James Lovelock

I recently read two books, one by a physicist, and one by an
economist.In *Out of Gas*, Caltech physicist David Goodstein describes
an impendingenergy crisis brought on by The End of the Age of Oil. This
crisis is comingsoon, he predicts: the crisis will bite, not when the
last drop of oil isextracted, but when oil extraction can’t meet demand
– perhaps as soonas 2015 or 2025. Moreover, even if we magically
switched all our energy-guzzling to nuclear power right away, Goodstein
says, the oil crisis wouldsimply be replaced by a *nuclear* crisis in
just twenty years or so, as uraniumreserves also became depleted.

In *The Skeptical Environmentalist*, Bjørn Lomborg paints a
completelydifferent picture. “Everything is ﬁne.” Indeed, “everything is
getting bet-ter.” Furthermore, “we are not headed for a major energy
crisis,” and“there is plenty of energy.”

How could two smart people come to such different conclusions? I hadto
get to the bottom of this.

Energy made it into the British news in 2006. Kindled by tidings ofgreat
climate change and a tripling in the price of natural gas in just
sixyears, the ﬂames of debate are raging. How should Britain handle
itsenergy needs? And how should the world?

“Wind or nuclear?”, for example. Greater polarization of views
amongsmart people is hard to imagine. During a discussion of the
proposed ex-pansion of nuclear power, Michael Meacher, former
environment minister,said “if we’re going to cut greenhouse gases by 60%
... by 2050 there is noother possible way of doing that except through
renewables;” Sir BernardIngham, former civil servant, speaking in favour
of nuclear expansion, said“anybody who is relying upon renewables to ﬁll
the [energy] gap is livingin an utter dream world and is, in my view, an
enemy of the people.”

Similar disagreement can be heard within the ecological movement.All
agree that *something* must be done urgently, but *what?* Jonathon
Por-ritt, chair of the Sustainable Development Commission, writes:
“there isno justiﬁcation for bringing forward plans for a new nuclear
power pro-gramme at this time, and ... any such proposal would be
incompatiblewith [the Government’s] sustainable development strategy;”
and “a non-nuclear strategy could and should be sufﬁcient to deliver all
the carbonsavings we shall need up to 2050 and beyond, and to ensure
secure accessto reliable sources of energy.” In contrast,
environmentalist James Lovelockwrites in his book, *The Revenge of
Gaia*: “Now is much too late to establishsustainable development.” In
his view, power from nuclear ﬁssion, while

![OutOfGas](OutOfGasS.jpg)

David Goodstein’s *Out of Gas* (2004).

![SkepticalEnvironmentalist](lomborgSES.jpg)

Bjørn Lomborg’s *The Skeptical Environmentalist* (2001).

![RevengeOfGaia](revengeOfGaiaS.jpg)

*The Revenge of Gaia: Why the earth is ﬁghting back – and how we can
still save humanity.* James Lovelock (2006). © Allen Lane.

not recommended as the long-term panacea for our ailing planet, is
“theonly effective medicine we have now.” Onshore wind turbines are
“merely ... a gesture to prove [our leaders’] environmental
credentials.”

This heated debate is fundamentally about numbers. How much energy
could each source deliver, at what economic and social cost, and
withwhat risks? But actual numbers are rarely mentioned. In public
debates,people just say “Nuclear is a money pit” or “We have a *huge*
amount ofwave and wind.” The trouble with this sort of language is that
it’s notsufﬁcient to know that something is huge: we need to know how
the one“huge” compares with another “huge,” namely *our huge energy
consump-**tion*. To make this comparison, we need numbers, not
adjectives.

Where numbers are used, their meaning is often obfuscated by
enor-mousness. Numbers are chosen to impress, to score points in
arguments,rather than to inform. “Los Angeles residents drive 142
million miles – the distance from Earth to Mars – every single day.”
“Each year, 27 millionacres of tropical rainforest are destroyed.” “14
billion pounds of trash aredumped into the sea every year.” “British
people throw away 2.6 billionslices of bread per year.” “The waste paper
buried each year in the UKcould ﬁll 103448 double-decker buses.”

If all the ineffective ideas for solving the energy crisis were laid end
toend, they would reach to the moon and back.... I digress.

The result of this lack of meaningful numbers and facts? We are
inun-dated with a ﬂood of crazy innumerate codswallop. The BBC doles
outadvice on how we can do our bit to save the planet – for example
“switchoff your mobile phone charger when it’s not in use;” if anyone
objects thatmobile phone chargers are not *actually* our number one form
of energyconsumption, the mantra “every little helps” is wheeled out.
Every littlehelps? A more realistic mantra is:

> if everyone does a little, we’ll achieve only a little.

Companies also contribute to the daily codswallop as they tell us
howwonderful they are, or how they can help us “do our bit.” BP’s
website, forexample, celebrates the reductions in carbon dioxide (CO~2~)
pollution theyhope to achieve by changing the paint used for painting
BP’s ships. Doesanyone fall for this? Surely everyone will guess that
it’s not the exteriorpaint job, it’s the stuff *inside* the tanker that
deserves attention, if society’sCO~2~ emissions are to be signiﬁcantly
cut? BP also created a web-basedcarbon absolution service,
“targetneutral.com,” which claims that they can“neutralize” all your
carbon emissions, and that it “doesn’t cost the earth”– indeed, that
your CO~2~ pollution can be cleaned up for just £40 per year.How can
this add up? – if the true cost of ﬁxing climate change were £40per
person then the government could ﬁx it with the loose change in
theChancellor’s pocket!

Even more reprehensible are companies that exploit the current
concernfor the environment by offering “water-powered batteries,”
“biodegrad-

For the beneﬁt of readers who speakAmerican, rather than English,
thetranslation of “every little helps” intoAmerican is “every little bit
helps.”

able mobile phones,” “portable arm-mounted wind-turbines,” and
otherpointless tat.

Campaigners also mislead. People who want to promote renewablesover
nuclear, for example, say “offshore wind power could power all UKhomes;”
then they say “new nuclear power stations will do little to
tackleclimate change” because 10 new nuclear stations would “reduce
emissionsonly by about 4%.” This argument is misleading because the
playing ﬁeldis switched half-way through, from the “number of homes
powered” to “reduction of emissions.” The truth is that the amount of
electrical powergenerated by the wonderful windmills that “could power
all UK homes” is *exactly the same* as the amount that would be generated
by the 10 nuclearpower stations! “Powering all UK homes” accounts for
just 4% of UKemissions.

Perhaps the worst offenders in the kingdom of codswallop are the peo-ple
who really should know better – the media publishers who promotethe
codswallop – for example, New Scientist with their article about
the “water-powered car.” \*

In a climate where people don’t understand the numbers,
newspapers, campaigners, companies, and politicians can get away with
murder.

We need simple numbers, and we need the numbers to be comprehen-sible,
comparable, and memorable.

With numbers in place, we will be better placed to answer questionssuch
as these:

1.  Can a country like Britain conceivably live on its own renewable
    energy sources?
2.  If everyone turns their thermostats one degree closer to the
    outside temperature, drives a smaller car, and switches off phone
    chargers when not in use, will an energy crisis be averted?
3.  Should the tax on transportation fuels be signiﬁcantly
    increased? Should speed-limits on roads be halved?
4.  Is someone who advocates windmills over nuclear power stations “an
    enemy of the people”?
5.  If climate change is “a greater threat than terrorism,” should
    govern-ments criminalize “the gloriﬁcation of travel” and pass laws
    against “advocating acts of consumption”?
6.  Will a switch to “advanced technologies” allow us to eliminate
    carbon dioxide pollution without changing our lifestyle?
7.  Should people be encouraged to eat more vegetarian food?
8.  Is the population of the earth six times too big?

\*See this chapter’s notes (p19) for theawful details. (Every chapter
has endnotes giving references, sources, and details of arguments. To
avoid distracting the reader, I won’t includeany more footnote marks in
the text.)

![Greenpeace leaflet](figure3.png)

Figure 1.1. This Greenpeace leaﬂetarrived with my junk mail in May2006.
Do beloved windmills have the capacity to displace hated cooling towers?

Why are we discussing energy policy?
------------------------------------

Three different motivations drive today’s energy discussions.

First, fossil fuels are a ﬁnite resource. It seems possible that cheap
oil (on which our cars and lorries run) and cheap gas (with which we
heat many of our buildings) will run out in our lifetime. So we seek
alternative energy sources. Indeed given that fossil fuels are a valuable
resource, useful for manufacture of plastics and all sorts of other
creative stuff, perhaps we should save them for better uses than simply
setting ﬁre to them.

Second, we’re interested in security of energy supply. Even if
fossil fuels are still available somewhere in the world, perhaps we don’t
want to depend on them if that would make our economy vulnerable to the
whims of untrustworthy foreigners. (I hope you can hear my tongue in my
cheek.) Going by ﬁgure 1.2, it certainly looks as if “our” fossil fuels
have peaked. The UK has a particular security-of-supply problem looming,
known as the “energy gap.” A substantial number of old coal power
stations and nuclear power stations will be closing down during the next
decade (ﬁgure 1.3), so there is a risk that electricity demand will
sometimes exceed electricity supply, if adequate plans are not
implemented.

Third, it’s very probable that using fossil fuels changes the
climate.Climate change is blamed on several human activities, but the
biggest con-tributor to climate change is the increase in greenhouse
effect produced bycarbon dioxide (CO~2~). Most of the carbon dioxide
emissions come from fossil-fuel burning. And the main reason we burn
fossil fuels is for energy.So to ﬁx climate change, we need to sort out
a new way of getting energy.The climate problem is mostly an energy
problem.

Whichever of these three concerns motivates you, we need energy
num-bers, and policies that add up.

The ﬁrst two concerns are straightforward selﬁsh motivations for
dras-tically reducing fossil fuel use. The third concern, climate
change, is a morealtruistic motivation – the brunt of climate change
will be borne not by usbut by future generations over many hundreds of
years. Some people feelthat climate change is not their responsibility.
They say things like “What’s the point in my doing anything? China’s out
of control!” So I’m going todiscuss climate change a bit more now,
because while writing this book Ilearned some interesting facts that
shed light on these ethical questions. Ifyou have no interest in climate
change, feel free to fast-forward to the nextsection on page 16.

The climate-change motivation
-----------------------------

The climate-change motivation is argued in three steps: one: human
fossil-fuel burning causes carbon dioxide concentrations to rise; two:
carbondioxide is a greenhouse gas; three: increasing the greenhouse
effect in-creases average global temperatures (and has many other
effects).

![North Sea Oil production](figure4.png)

Figure 1.2 Are“our” fossil fuelsrunning out? Total crude oilproduction
from the North Sea, andoil price in 2006 dollars per barrel.

![UK energy gap](figure5.png)

Figure 1.3 The energy gap created byUK power station closures,
asprojected by energy company EdF.This graph shows the predictedcapacity
of nuclear, coal, and oilpower stations, in kilowatt-hours perday per
person. The capacity is themaximum deliverable power of asource.

![CO2 concentrations](figure6.png)

We start with the fact that carbon dioxide concentrations are
rising.Figure 1.4 shows measurements of the CO~2~ concentration in the
air fromthe year 1000AD to the present. Some “sceptics” have asserted
that the re-cent increase in CO~2~ concentration is a natural
phenomenon. Does “scep-tic” mean “a person who has not even glanced at
the data”? Don’t youthink, just possibly, *something* may have happened
between 1800AD and2000AD? Something that was not part of the natural
processes present inthe preceding thousand years?

Something did happen, and it was called the Industrial Revolution.I’ve
marked on the graph the year 1769, in which James Watt patentedhis steam
engine. While the ﬁrst practical steam engine was invented in1698,
Watt’s more efﬁcient steam engine really got the Industrial Revolu-tion
going. One of the steam engine’s main applications was the pumpingof
water out of coal mines. Figure 1.5 shows what happened to Britishcoal
production from 1769 onwards. The ﬁgure displays coal productionin units
of billions of tons of CO~2~ released when the coal was burned.In 1800,
coal was used to make iron, to make ships, to heat buildings,to power
locomotives and other machinery, and of course to power thepumps that
enabled still more coal to be scraped up from inside the hillsof England
and Wales. Britain was terribly well endowed with coal: whenthe
Revolution started, the amount of carbon sitting in coal under
Britainwas roughly the same as the amount sitting in oil under Saudi
Arabia.

In the 30 years from 1769 to 1800, Britain’s annual coal
productiondoubled. After another 30 years (1830), it had doubled again.
The nextdoubling of production-rate happened within *20* years (1850),
and another

Figure 1.4. Carbon dioxide (CO~2~)concentrations (in parts per
million)for the last 1100 years, measured fromair trapped in ice cores
(up to 1977)and directly in Hawaii (from 1958onwards).

I think something new may havehappened between 1800 AD and2000 AD. I’ve
marked the year 1769,in which James Watt patented hissteam engine. (The
ﬁrst practicalsteam engine was invented 70 yearsearlier in 1698, but
Watt’s was muchmore efﬁcient.)

![ ](figure13.png)

Figure 1.5. The history of UK coalproduction and world coalproduction
from 1600 to 1910.Production rates are shown in billionsof tons of CO~2~
– an incomprehensibleunit, yes, but don’t worry: we’llpersonalize it
shortly.

doubling within 20 years of that (1870). This coal allowed Britain to
turnthe globe pink. The prosperity that came to England and Wales was
re-ﬂected in a century of unprecedented population growth:

![population England](figure14.png)

Eventually other countries got in on the act too as the Revolution
spread.Figure 1.6 shows British coal production and world coal
production onthe same scale as ﬁgure 1.5, sliding the window of history
50 years later.British coal production peaked in 1910, but meanwhile
world coal produc-tion continued to double every 20 years. It’s difﬁcult
to show the historyof coal production on a single graph. To show what
happened in the *next*50 years on the same scale, the book would need to
be one metre tall! Tocope with this difﬁculty, we can either scale down
the vertical axis:

![population world](figure15.png)

or we can squish the vertical axis in a non-uniform way, so that small
quan-tities and large quantities can be seen at the same time on a
single graph. Agood way to squish the axis is called a logarithmic
scale, and that’s whatI’ve used in the bottom two graphs of ﬁgure 1.7
(p9). On a logarithmicscale, all ten-fold increases (from 1 to 10, from
10 to 100, from 100 to 1000)are represented by equal distances on the
page. On a logarithmic scale, aquantity that grows at a constant
percentage per year (which is called “ex-ponential growth”) looks like a
straight line. Logarithmic graphs are great

![UK and world coal production](figure16.png)

Figure 1.6. What happened next.The history of UK coal productionand
world coal production from 1650to 1960, on the same scale asﬁgure 1.5.

for understanding growth. Whereas the ordinary graphs in the ﬁgures
onpages 6 and 7 convey the messages that British and world coal
productiongrew remarkably, and that British and world population grew
remarkably,the relative growth rates are not evident in these ordinary
graphs. The log-arithmic graphs allow us to compare growth rates.
Looking at the slopesof the population curves, for example, we can see
that the world popula-tion’s growth rate in the last 50 years was a
little bigger than the growthrate of England and Wales in 1800.

From 1769 to 2006, world annual coal production increased 800-fold.Coal
production is still increasing today. Other fossil fuels are being
ex-tracted too – the middle graph of ﬁgure 1.7 shows oil production for
ex-ample – but in terms of CO~2~ emissions, coal is still king.

The burning of fossil fuels is the principal reason why CO~2~
concentra-tions have gone up. This is a fact, but, hang on: I hear a
persistent buzzingnoise coming from a bunch of climate-change
inactivists. What are theysaying? Here’s Dominic Lawson, a columnist
from the *Independent*:

> “The burning of fossil fuels sends about seven gigatons of CO~2~per
> year into the atmosphere, which sounds like a lot. Yet thebiosphere
> and the oceans send about 1900 gigatons and 36000gigatons of CO~2~ per
> year into the atmosphere – ... one reasonwhy some of us are sceptical
> about the emphasis put on the roleof human fuel-burning in the
> greenhouse gas effect. Reducingman-made CO 2 emissions is megalomania,
> exaggerating man’ssigniﬁcance. Politicians can’t change the weather.”

Now I have a lot of time for scepticism, and not everything that
sceptics sayis a crock of manure – but irresponsible journalism like
Dominic Lawson’sdeserves a good ﬂushing.

The ﬁrst problem with Lawson’s offering is that *all three numbers*
thathe mentions (seven, 1900, and 36000) are *wrong!* The correct
numbers are26, 440, and 330. Leaving these errors to one side, let’s
address Lawson’smain point, the relative smallness of man-made
emissions.

Yes, natural ﬂows of CO~2~ *are* larger than the additional ﬂow we
switchedon 200 years ago when we started burning fossil fuels in
earnest. But itis terribly misleading to quantify only the large natural
ﬂows *into* the at-mosphere, failing to mention the almost exactly equal
ﬂows *out* of theatmosphere back into the biosphere and the oceans. The
point is that these*natural* ﬂows in and out of the atmosphere have been
almost exactly inbalance for millenia. So it’s not relevant at all that
these natural ﬂows arelarger than human emissions. The natural ﬂows
*cancelled themselves out*.So the natural ﬂows, large though they were,
left the concentration of CO~2~in the atmosphere and ocean *constant*,
over the last few thousand years.Burning fossil fuels, in contrast,
creates a *new* ﬂow of carbon that, thoughsmall, is *not cancelled*.
Here’s a simple analogy, set in the passport-controlarrivals area of an
airport. One thousand passengers arrive per hour, and

![CO2 concentrations, consequences of Industrial
Revolution](figure7.png)

Figure 1.7. The upper graph showscarbon dioxide CO~2~ concentrations(in
parts per million) for the last 1100years – the same data that was
shownin ﬁgure 1.4.

Here’s a portrait of James Watt andhis 1769 steam engine.

![James Watt](jw.png)

The middle graph shows (on alogarithmic scale) the history of UKcoal
production, Saudi oil production,world coal production, world
oilproduction, and (by the top rightpoint) the total of all greenhouse
gasemissions in the year 2000. Allproduction rates are expressed inunits
of the associated CO~2~ emissions.

The bottom graph shows (on alogarithmic scale) some consequencesof the
Industrial Revolution: sharpincreases in the population ofEngland, and,
in due course, theworld; and remarkable growth inBritish pig-iron
production (inthousand tons per year); and growthin the tonnage of
British ships (inthousand tons).

In contrast to the ordinary graphs onthe previous pages, the
logarithmicscale allows us to show both thepopulation of England and
thepopulation of the World on a singlediagram, and to see
interestingfeatures in both.

there are exactly enough clockwork ofﬁcials to process one thousand
pas-sengers per hour. There’s a modest queue, but because of the match
ofarrival rate to service rate, the queue isn’t getting any longer. Now
imag-ine that owing to fog an extra stream of ﬂights is diverted here
from asmaller airport. This stream adds an extra 50 passengers per hour
to thearrivals lobby – a small addition compared to the original arrival
rate ofone thousand per hour. Initially at least, the authorities don’t
increase thenumber of ofﬁcials, and the ofﬁcials carry on processing
just one thousandpassengers per hour. So what happens? Slowly but
surely, *the queue grows*.Burning fossil fuels is undeniably increasing
the CO~2~ concentration in theatmosphere and in the surface oceans. No
climate scientist disputes thisfact. When it comes to CO~2~
concentrations, man *is* signiﬁcant.

OK. Fossil fuel burning increases CO~2~ concentrations signiﬁcantly.
Butdoes it matter? “Carbon is nature!”, the oilspinners remind us,
“Carbon islife!” If CO~2~ had no harmful effects, then indeed carbon
emissions wouldnot matter. However, carbon dioxide is a greenhouse gas.
Not the strongestgreenhouse gas, but a signiﬁcant one nonetheless. Put
more of it in theatmosphere, and it does what greenhouse gases do: it
absorbs infraredradiation (heat) heading out from the earth and reemits
it in a random di-rection; the effect of this random redirection of the
atmospheric heat trafﬁcis to impede the ﬂow of heat from the planet,
just like a quilt. So carbondioxide has a warming effect. This fact is
based not on complex historicalrecords of global temperatures but on the
simple physical properties ofCO~2~ molecules. Greenhouse gases are a
quilt, and CO~2~ is one layer of thequilt.

So, if humanity succeeds in doubling or tripling CO~2~
concentrations(which is where we are certainly heading, under business
as usual), whathappens? Here, there is a lot of uncertainty. Climate
science is difﬁcult.The climate is a complex, twitchy beast, and exactly
how much warmingCO~2~ -doubling would produce is uncertain. The
consensus of the best cli-mate models seems to be that doubling the
CO~2~ concentration would haveroughly the same effect as increasing the
intensity of the sun by 2%, andwould bump up the global mean temperature
by something like 3°C. Thiswould be what historians call a Bad Thing. I
won’t recite the whole litanyof probable drastic effects, as I am sure
you’ve heard it before. The litanybegins “the Greenland icecap would
gradually melt, and, over a period ofa few 100 years, sea-level would
rise by about 7 metres.” The brunt of thelitany falls on future
generations. Such temperatures have not been seenon earth for at least
100000 years, and it’s conceivable that the ecosystemwould be so
signiﬁcantly altered that the earth would stop supplying someof the
goods and services that we currently take for granted.

Climate modelling is difﬁcult and is dogged by uncertainties. But
un-certainty about exactly how the climate will respond to extra
greenhousegases is no justiﬁcation for inaction. If you were riding a
fast-moving mo-torcycle in fog near a cliff-edge, and you didn’t have a
good map of thecliff, would the lack of a map justify *not* slowing the
bike down?

So, who should slow the bike down? Who should clean up carbonemissions?
Who is responsible for climate change? This is an ethical ques-tion, of
course, not a scientiﬁc one, but ethical discussions must be foundedon
facts. Let’s now explore the facts about greenhouse gas emissions.
First,a word about the units in which they are measured. Greenhouse
gasesinclude carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide; each gas has
dif-ferent physical properties; it’s conventional to express all gas
emissionsin “equivalent amounts of carbon dioxide,” where “equivalent”
means“having the same warming effect over a period of 100 years.” One
tonof carbon-dioxide-equivalent may be abbreviated as “1 t CO~2~e,” and
onebillion tons (one thousand million tons) as “1 Gt CO~2~e” (one
gigaton). Inthis book 1 t means one metric ton (1000 kg). I’m not going
to distinguishimperial tons, because they differ by less than 10% from
the metric ton ortonne.

In the year 2000, the world’s greenhouse gas emissions were about
34billion tons of CO~2~-equivalent per year. An incomprehensible
number.But we can render it more comprehensible and more personal by
divid-ing by the number of people on the planet, 6 billion, so as to
obtain thegreenhouse-gas pollution *per person*, which is about 5½ tons
CO~2~e per yearper person. We can thus represent the world emissions by
a rectanglewhose width is the population (6 billion) and whose height is
the per-capita emissions.

![Greenhouse gas pollution](figure9.png)

Now, all people are created equal, but we don’t all emit 5½ tons of
CO~2~per year. We can break down the emissions of the year 2000, showing
howthe 34-billion-ton rectangle is shared between the regions of the
world:

![Greenhouse gas pollution](figure10.png)

This picture, which is on the same scale as the previous one, divides
theworld into eight regions. Each rectangle’s area represents the
greenhousegas emissions of one region. The width of the rectangle is the
populationof the region, and the height is the average per-capita
emissions in thatregion.

In the year 2000, Europe’s per-capita greenhouse gas emissions weretwice
the world average; and North America’s were four times the worldaverage.

We can continue subdividing, splitting each of the regions into
coun-tries. This is where it gets really interesting:

![Greenhouse gas pollution](figure11.png)

The major countries with the biggest per-capita emissions are
Australia,the USA, and Canada. European countries, Japan, and South
Africa arenotable runners up. Among European countries, the United
Kingdomis resolutely average. What about China, that naughty “out of
control”country? Yes, the area of China’s rectangle is about the same as
the USA’s,but the fact is that their per-capita emissions are *below*
the world average.India’s per-capita emissions are less than *half* the
world average. Moreover,it’s worth bearing in mind that much of the
industrial emissions of Chinaand India are associated with the
manufacture of *stuff for rich countries.*

So, assuming that “something needs to be done” to reduce greenhousegas
emissions, who has a special responsibility to do something? As Isaid,
that’s an ethical question. But I ﬁnd it hard to imagine any systemof
ethics that denies that the responsibility falls especially on the
countries

to the left hand side of this diagram – the countries whose emissions
aretwo, three, or four times the world average. Countries that are most
ableto pay. Countries like Britain and the USA, for example.

### Historical responsibility for climate impact

If we assume that the climate has been damaged by human activity,
andthat someone needs to ﬁx it, who should pay? Some people say
“thepolluter should pay.” The preceding pictures showed who’s doing
thepolluting today. But it isn’t the *rate* of CO~2~ pollution that
matters, it’sthe cumulative *total* emissions; much of the emitted
carbon dioxide (aboutone third of it) will hang around in the atmosphere
for at least 50 or 100years. If we accept the ethical idea that “the
polluter should pay” thenwe should ask how big is each country’s
historical footprint. The nextpicture shows each country’s cumulative
emissions of CO~2~, expressed asan average emission rate over the period
1880–2004.

![Average pollution rate](figure12.png)

Congratulations, Britain! The UK has made it onto the winners’ podium.We
may be only an average European country today, but in the table
ofhistorical emitters, per capita, we are second only to the USA.

OK, that’s enough ethics. What do scientists reckon needs to be done,to
avoid a risk of giving the earth a 2°C temperature rise (2°C being
therise above which they predict lots of bad consequences)? The
consensusis clear. We need to get off our fossil fuel habit, and we need
to do sofast. Some countries, including Britain, have committed to at
least a 60%reduction in greenhouse-gas emissions by 2050, but it must be
emphasizedthat 60% cuts, radical though they are, are unlikely to cut
the mustard. Ifthe world’s emissions were gradually reduced by 60% by
2050, climate sci-

entists reckon it’s more likely than not that global temperatures will
riseby more than 2°C. The sort of cuts we need to aim for are shown in
ﬁg-ure 1.8. This ﬁgure shows two possibly-safe emissions scenarios
presentedby Baer and Mastrandrea (2006) in a report from the Institute
for Pub-lic Policy Research. The lower curve assumes that a decline in
emissionsstarted in 2007, with total global emissions falling at roughly
5% per year.The upper curve assumes a brief delay in the start of the
decline, and a 4%drop per year in global emissions. Both scenarios are
believed to offer amodest chance of avoiding a 2°C temperature rise
above the pre-industriallevel. In the lower scenario, the chance that
the temperature rise will *ex-**ceed* 2°C is estimated to be 9–26%. In
the upper scenario, the chance ofexceeding 2°C is estimated to be
16–43%. These possibly-safe emissionstrajectories, by the way, involve
signiﬁcantly sharper reductions in emis-sions than any of the scenarios
presented by the Intergovernmental Panelon Climate Change (IPCC), or by
the Stern Review (2007).

These possibly-safe trajectories require global emissions to fall by
70%or 85% by 2050. What would this mean for a country like Britain? Ifwe
subscribe to the idea of “contraction and convergence,” which meansthat
all countries aim eventually to have equal per-capita emissions,
thenBritain needs to aim for cuts greater than 85%: it should get down
from itscurrent 11 tons of CO~2~e per year per person to roughly 1 ton
per year per

![World greenhouse gas emissions](figure8.png)

![Global emissions scenarios](figure17.png)

Figure 1.8. Global emissions for twoscenarios considered by Baer
andMastrandrea, expressed in tons ofCO~2~ per year per person, using
aworld population of six billion. Bothscenarios are believed to offer
amodest chance of avoiding a 2°Ctemperature rise above thepre-industrial
level.

Figure 1.9. Breakdown of worldgreenhouse-gas emissions (2000) bycause
and by gas. “Energy” includespower stations, industrial
processes,transport, fossil fuel processing, andenergy-use in buildings.
“Land use,biomass burning” means changes inland use, deforestation, and
theburning of un-renewed biomass suchas peat. “Waste” includes
wastedisposal and treatment. The sizesindicate the 100-year global
warmingpotential of each source. Source:Emission Database for
GlobalAtmospheric Research.

person by 2050. This is such a deep cut, I suggest the best way to
thinkabout it is *no more fossil fuels.*

One last thing about the climate-change motivation: while a range
ofhuman activities cause greenhouse-gas emissions, the biggest cause by
faris **energy use**. Some people justify not doing anything about their
energyuse by excuses such as “methane from burping cows causes more
warmingthan jet travel.” Yes, agricultural by-products contributed one
eighth ofgreenhouse-gas emissions in the year 2000. But energy-use
contributedthree quarters (ﬁgure 1.9). The climate change problem is
principally anenergy problem.

Warnings to the reader
----------------------

OK, enough about climate change. I’m going to assume we are motivatedto
get off fossil fuels. Whatever your motivation, the aim of this bookis
to help you ﬁgure out the numbers and do the arithmetic so that youcan
evaluate policies; and to lay a factual foundation so that you can
see*which proposals add up*. I’m not claiming that the arithmetic and
numbersin this book are new; the books I’ve mentioned by Goodstein,
Lomborg,and Lovelock, for example, are full of interesting numbers and
back-of-envelope calculations, and there are many other helpful sources
on theinternet too (see the notes at the end of each chapter).

What I’m aiming to do in this book is to make these numbers simpleand
memorable; to show you how you can ﬁgure out the numbers foryourself;
and to make the situation so clear that any thinking reader willbe able
to draw striking conclusions. I don’t want to feed you my own
con-clusions. Convictions are stronger if they are self-generated,
rather thantaught. Understanding is a creative process. When you’ve read
this bookI hope you’ll have reinforced the conﬁdence that you can ﬁgure
anythingout.

I’d like to emphasize that the calculations we will do are
deliberatelyimprecise. Simpliﬁcation is a key to understanding. First,
by rounding thenumbers, we can make them easier to remember. Second,
rounded num-bers allow quick calculations. For example, in this book,
the populationof the United Kingdom is 60 million, and the population of
the world is6 billion. I’m perfectly capable of looking up more accurate
ﬁgures, butaccuracy would get in the way of ﬂuent thought. For example,
if we learnthat the world’s greenhouse gas emissions in 2000 were 34
billion tons ofCO~2~-equivalent per year, then we can instantly note,
without a calculator,that the average emissions per person are 5 or 6
tons of CO~2~-equivalent perperson per year. This rough answer is not
exact, but it’s accurate enough toinform interesting conversations. For
instance, if you learn that a round-trip intercontinental ﬂight emits
nearly two tons of CO~2~ per passenger,then knowing the average
emissions yardstick (5-and-a-bit tons per yearper person) helps you
realize that just one such plane-trip per year corre-

![Low carbon emission man - cartoon](LowEManS.jpg)

*“Look – it’s Low Carbon EmissionMan”*

Figure 1.10. Reproduced by kindpermission of PRIVATE EYE / PeterDredge
www.private-eye.co.uk.

sponds to over a third of the average person’s carbon emissions.

I like to base my calculations on everyday knowledge rather than
ontrawling through impersonal national statistics. For example, if I
wantto estimate the typical wind speeds in Cambridge, I ask “is my
cyclingspeed usually faster than the wind?” The answer is yes. So I can
deducethat the wind speed in Cambridge is only rarely faster than my
typicalcycling speed of 20km/h. I back up these everyday estimates with
otherpeoples’ calculations and with ofﬁcial statistics. (Please look for
these ineach chapter’s end-notes.) This book isn’t intended to be a
deﬁnitive storeof super-accurate numbers. Rather, it’s intended to
illustrate how to useapproximate numbers as a part of constructive
consensual conversations.

In the calculations, I’ll mainly use the United Kingdom and
occasion-ally Europe, America, or the whole world, but you should ﬁnd it
easy toredo the calculations for whatever country or region you are
interested in.

Let me close this chapter with a few more warnings to the reader.Not
only will we make a habit of approximating the numbers we cal-culate;
we’ll also neglect all sorts of details that investors, managers,
andeconomists have to attend to, poor folks. If you’re trying to launch
a re-newable technology, just a 5% increase in costs may make all the
differencebetween success and failure, so in business every detail must
be tracked.But 5% is too small for this book’s radar. This is a book
about factors of2 and factors of 10. It’s about physical limits to
sustainable energy, notcurrent economic feasibility. While economics is
always changing, the fun-damental limits won’t ever go away. We need to
understand these limits.

Debates about energy policy are often confusing and emotional
becausepeople mix together *factual* assertions and *ethical*
assertions.

Examples of **factual assertions** are “global fossil-fuel burning emits
34billion tons of carbon dioxide equivalent per year;” and “if CO~2~
concen-trations are doubled then average temperatures will increase by
1.5–5.8°Cin the next 100 years;” and “a temperature rise of 2°C would
cause theGreenland ice cap to melt within 500 years;” and “the complete
melting ofthe Greenland ice cap would cause a 7-metre sea-level rise.”

A factual assertion is either true or false; ﬁguring out *which* may be
dif-ﬁcult; it is a scientiﬁc question. For example, the assertions I
just gave areeither true or false. But we don’t know whether they are
all true. Some ofthem are currently judged “very likely.” The difﬁculty
of deciding whichfactual assertions are true leads to debates in the
scientiﬁc community. Butgiven sufﬁcient scientiﬁc experiment and
discussion, the truth or falsity ofmost factual assertions can
eventually be resolved, at least “beyond rea-sonable doubt.”

Examples of **ethical assertions** are “it’s wrong to exploit global
re-sources in a way that imposes signiﬁcant costs on future
generations;” and“polluting should not be free;” and “we should take
steps to ensure thatit’s unlikely that CO~2~ concentrations will
double;” and “politicians shouldagree a cap on CO~2~ emissions;” and
“countries with the biggest CO~2~ emis-

sions over the last century have a duty to lead action on climate
change;”and “it is fair to share CO~2~ emission rights equally across
the world’spopulation.” Such assertions are not “either true or false.”
Whether weagree with them depends on our ethical judgment, on our
values. Ethicalassertions may be incompatible with each other; for
example, Tony Blair’sgovernment declared a radical policy on CO~2~
emissions: “the United King-dom should reduce its CO~2~ emissions by 60%
by 2050;” at the same timeGordon Brown, while Chancellor in that
government, repeatedly urgedoil-producing countries to *increase* oil
production.

This book is emphatically intended to be about facts, not ethics. I
wantthe facts to be clear, so that people can have a meaningful debate
aboutethical decisions. I want everyone to understand how the facts
constrainthe options that are open to us. Like a good scientist, I’ll
try to keep myviews on ethical questions out of the way, though
occasionally I’ll blurtsomething out – please forgive me.

Whether it’s *fair* for Europe and North America to hog the energy
cakeis an ethical question; I’m here to remind you of the *fact* that we
can’thave our cake and eat it too; to help you weed out the pointless
and inef-fective policy proposals; and to help you identify energy
policies that arecompatible with your personal values.

We need a plan that adds up!

Notes and further reading
-------------------------

At the end of each chapter I note details of ideas in that chapter,
sources of data and quotes, and pointers to furtherinformation.

page no.

2*“...no other possible way of doing that except through renewables”;
“anybody who is relying upon renewables to ﬁllthe [energy] gap is living
in an utter dream world and is, in my view, an enemy of the people.”*
The quotes are from*Any Questions?*, 27 January 2006, BBC Radio 4
[ydoobr]. *Michael Meacher* was UK environment minister from 1997till
2003. *Sir Bernard Ingham* was an aide to Margaret Thatcher when she was
prime minister, and was Head of theGovernment Information Service. He is
secretary of Supporters of Nuclear Energy.

–*Jonathon Porritt* (March 2006). *Is nuclear the answer?* Section 3.
Advice to Ministers. www.sd-commission.org.uk

3*“Nuclear is a money pit”, “We have a huge amount of wave and wind.”*
Ann Leslie, journalist. Speaking on *AnyQuestions?*, Radio 4, 10
February 2006.

–*Los Angeles residents drive ... from Earth to Mars* – (The Earthworks
Group, 1989, page 34).

–*targetneutral.com* charges just £4 per ton of CO~2~ for their
“neutralization.” (A signiﬁcantly lower price than anyother “offsetting”
company I have come across.) At this price, a typical Brit could have
his 11 tons per year “neutral-ized” for just £44 per year! Evidence that
BP’s “neutralization” schemes don’t really add up comes from the fact
that itsprojects have not achieved the Gold Standard
www.cdmgoldstandard.org (Michael Schlup, personal communication).Many
“carbon offset” projects have been exposed as worthless by Fiona Harvey
of the Financial Times [2jhve6].

4*People who want to promote renewables over nuclear, for example, say
“offshore wind power could power all UKhomes.”* At the end of 2007, the
UK government announced that they would allow the building of offshore
wind

![Do nothing - cartoon ](DoNothing5M.jpg)

*“Okay – it’s agreed; we announce– ‘to do nothing is not an option!’then
we wait and see how thingspan out...”*

Figure 1.11. Reproduced by kindpermission of PRIVATE EYE / PaulLowe
www.private-eye.co.uk.

turbines “enough to power all UK homes.” Friends of the Earth’s
renewable energy campaigner, Nick Rau, said thegroup welcomed the
government’s announcement. “The potential power that could be generated
by this industry isenormous,” he said. [25e59w]. From the Guardian
[5o7mxk]: John Sauven, the executive director of Greenpeace, saidthat
the plans amounted to a “wind energy revolution.” “And Labour needs to
drop its obsession with nuclear power,which could only ever reduce
emissions by about 4% at some time in the distant future.” Nick Rau
said: “We aredelighted the government is getting serious about the
potential for offshore wind, which could generate 25% of theUK’s
electricity by 2020.” A few weeks later, the government announced that
it would permit new nuclear stationsto be built. “Today’s decision to
give the go-ahead to a new generation of nuclear power stations ... will
do little totackle climate change,” Friends of the Earth warned
[5c4olc].In fact, the two proposed expansions – of offshore wind and of
nuclear – would both deliver just the same amountof electricity per
year. The total permitted offshore wind power of 33 GW would on average
deliver 10 GW, which is4 kWh per day per person; and the replacement of
all the retiring nuclear power stations would deliver 10 GW, whichis 4
kWh per day per person. Yet in the same breath, anti-nuclear campaigners
say that the nuclear option would “dolittle,” while the wind option
would “power all UK homes.” The fact is, “powering all UK homes” and
“only reducingemissions by about 4%” are the same thing.

4*“water-powered car”* *New Scientist*, 29th July 2006, p.35. This
article, headlined “Water-powered car might be availableby 2009,” opened
thus:“Forget cars fuelled by alcohol and vegetable oil. Before long, you
might be able to run your car with nothing morethan water in its fuel
tank. It would be the ultimate zero-emissions vehicle.“While water is
not at ﬁrst sight an obvious power source, it has a key virtue: it is an
abundant source of hydrogen,the element widely touted as the green fuel
of the future.”The work *New Scientist* was describing was not
ridiculous – it was actually about a car using *boron* as a fuel, with
aboron/water reaction as one of the ﬁrst chemical steps. Why did *New
Scientist* feel the urge to turn this into a storysuggesting that water
was the fuel? Water is not a fuel. It never has been, and it never will
be. It is already burned!The ﬁrst law of thermodynamics says you can’t
get energy for nothing; you can only convert energy from one formto
another. The energy in any engine must come from somewhere. Fox News
peddled an even more absurd story[2fztd3].

–*Climate change is a far greater threat to the world than international
terrorism.* Sir David King, Chief Scientiﬁc Advisorto the UK government,
January, 2004. [26e8z]

–*the gloriﬁcation of travel* – an allusion to the offence of
“gloriﬁcation” deﬁned in the UK’s Terrorism Act which cameinto force on
13 April, 2006. [ykhayj]

5*Figure 1.2.* This ﬁgure shows production of crude oil including lease
condensate, natural gas plant liquids, and otherliquids, and reﬁnery
processing gain. Sources: EIA, and BP statistical review of world
energy.

6*The ﬁrst practical steam engine was invented in 1698.* In fact, Hero
of Alexandria described a steam engine, but giventhat Hero’s engine
didn’t catch on in the following 1600 years, I deem Savery’s 1698
invention the ﬁrst *practical* steamengine.

–*Figures 1.4 and 1.7: Graph of carbon dioxide concentration.* The data
are collated from Keeling and Whorf (2005)(measurements spanning
1958–2004); Neftel et al. (1994) (1734–1983); Etheridge et al. (1998)
(1000–1978); Siegenthaleret al. (2005) (950–1888 AD); and Indermuhle et
al. (1999) (from 11000 to 450 years before present). This graph, by
theway, should not be confused with the “hockey stick graph”, which
shows the history of global *temperatures* . Attentivereaders will have
noticed that the climate-change argument I presented makes no mention of
*historical* temperatures.*Figures 1.5–1.7: Coal production* numbers are
from Jevons (1866), Malanima (2006), Netherlands Environmental
As-sessment Agency (2006), National Bureau of Economic Research (2001),
Hatcher (1993), Flinn and Stoker (1984), Churchet al. (1986), Supple
(1987), Ashworth and Pegg (1986). Jevons was the ﬁrst “Peak Oil” author.
In 1865, he estimatedBritain’s easily-accessible coal reserves, looked
at the history of exponential growth in consumption, and predicted
theend of the exponential growth and the end of the British dominance of
world industry. “We cannot long maintain our

present rate of increase of consumption. ... the check to our progress
must become perceptible within a century fromthe present time. ... the
conclusion is inevitable, that our present happy progressive condition
is a thing of limitedduration.” Jevons was right. Within a century
British coal production indeed peaked, and there were two world wars.

8*Dominic Lawson, a columnist from the Independent*. My quote is
adaptedfrom Dominic Lawson’s column in the *Independent*, 8 June,
2007.It is not a verbatim quote: I edited his words to make them briefer
but tookcare not to correct any of his errors. *All three numbers he
mentions are in-**correct*. Here’s how he screwed up. First, he says
“carbon dioxide” but givesnumbers for carbon: the burning of fossil
fuels sends *26* gigatonnes of CO~2~per year into the atmosphere (not 7
gigatonnes). A common mistake. Sec-ond, he claims that the oceans send
36000 gigatonnes of carbon per yearinto the atmosphere. This is a far
worse error: 36000 gigatonnes is the *totalamount* of carbon in the
ocean! The annual *ﬂow* is much smaller – about 90 gi-gatonnes of carbon
per year (330 GtCO~2~/y), according to standard diagramsof the carbon
cycle [l6y5g] (I believe this 90 GtC/y is the estimated ﬂowrate, were
the atmosphere suddenly to have its CO~2~ concentration reducedto zero.)
Similarly his “1900 gigatonne” ﬂow from biosphere to atmosphereis wrong.
The correct ﬁgure according to the standard diagrams is about
120gigatonnes of carbon per year (440 Gt CO~2~/y).

Incidentally, the observed rise in CO~2~ concentration is nicely in line
with what you’d expect, assuming most of thehuman emissions of carbon
remained in the atmosphere. From 1715 to 2004, roughly 1160 GtCO~2~ have
been releasedto the atmosphere from the consumption of fossil fuels and
cement production (Marland et al., 2007). If *all* of this CO~2~had
stayed in the atmosphere, the concentration would have risen by 160ppm
(from 280 to 440 ppm). The actual risehas been about 100ppm (from 275 to
377ppm). So roughly 60% of what was emitted is now in the atmosphere.

10*Carbon dioxide has a warming effect*. The over-emotional debate about
this topic is getting quite tiresome, isn’t it?“The science is now
settled.” “No it isn’t!” “Yes it is!” I think the most helpful thing I
can do here is direct anyonewho wants a break from the shouting to a
brief report written by Charney et al. (1979). This report’s
conclusionscarry weight because the National Academy of Sciences (the US
equivalent of the Royal Society) commissioned thereport and selected its
authors on the basis of their expertise, “and with regard for
appropriate balance.” The studygroup was convened “under the auspices of
the Climate Research Board of the National Research Council to assessthe
scientiﬁc basis for projection of possible future climatic changes
resulting from man-made releases of carbondioxide into the atmosphere.”
Speciﬁcally, they were asked: “to identify the principal premises on
which our currentunderstanding of the question is based, to assess
quantitatively the adequacy and uncertainty of our knowledge ofthese
factors and processes, and to summarize in concise and objective terms
our best present understanding of thecarbon dioxide/climate issue for
the beneﬁt of policy-makers.”The report is just 33 pages long, it is
free to download [5qfkaw], and I recommend it. It makes clear which bits
of thescience were already settled in 1979, and which bits still had
uncertainty.Here are the main points I picked up from this report.
First, doubling the atmospheric CO~2~ concentration wouldchange the net
heating of the troposphere, oceans, and land by an average power per
unit area of roughly 4 W/m^2^,if all other properties of the atmosphere
remained unchanged. This heating effect can be compared with the
averagepower absorbed by the atmosphere, land, and oceans, which is 238
W/m^2^. So doubling CO~2~ concentrations wouldhave a warming effect
equivalent to increasing the intensity of the sun by 4/238 = 1.7%.
Second, the consequencesof this CO~2~-induced heating are hard to
predict, on account of the complexity of the atmosphere/ocean system,
butthe authors predicted a global surface warming of between 2°C and
3.5°C, with greater increases at high latitudes.Finally, the authors
summarize: “we have tried but have been unable to ﬁnd any overlooked or
underestimatedphysical effects that could reduce the currently estimated
global warmings due to a doubling of atmospheric CO~2~ tonegligible
proportions or reverse them altogether.” They warn that, thanks to the
ocean, “the great and ponderousﬂywheel of the global climate system,” it
is quite possible that the warming would occur sufﬁciently sluggishly
that it

![Weights of carbon atom and CO2 molecule](figure245.png)

The weights of an atom of carbon and amolecule of CO~2~ are in the ratio
12 to 44,because the carbon atom weighs 12 unitsand the two oxygen atoms
weigh 16 each.12 + 16 + 16 = 44.

would be difﬁcult to detect in the coming decades. Nevertheless “warming
will eventually occur, and the associatedregional climatic changes ...
may well be signiﬁcant.”The foreword by the chairman of the Climate
Research Board, Verner E. Suomi, summarizes the conclusions with afamous
cascade of double negatives. “If carbon dioxide continues to increase,
the study group ﬁnds no reason to doubtthat climate changes will result
and no reason to believe that these changes will be negligible.”

10*The litany of probable drastic effects of climate change – I’m sure
you’ve heard it before*. See [2z2xg7] if not.

12*Breakdown of world greenhouse gas emissions by region and by
country*. Data source: Climate Analysis IndicatorsTool (CAIT) Version
4.0. (Washington, DC: World Resources Institute, 2007). The ﬁrst three
ﬁgures show national totalsof all six major greenhouse gases (CO~2~,
CH~4~, N~2~O, PFC, HFC, SF~6~), excluding contributions from land-use
change andforestry. The ﬁgure on p14 shows cumulative emissions of CO~2~
only.

14*Congratulations, Britain! ...in the table of historical emissions,
per capita, we are second only to the USA.* Sincereapologies here to
Luxembourg, whose historical per-capita emissions actually exceed those
of America and Britain;but I felt the winners’ podium should really be
reserved for countries having both large per-capita and large
totalemissions. In total terms the biggest historical emitters are, in
order, USA (322 GtCO~2~), Russian Federation (90 GtCO~2~),China (89
GtCO~2~), Germany (78 GtCO~2~), UK (62 GtCO~2~), Japan (43 GtCO~2~),
France (30 GtCO~2~), India (25 GtCO~2~), andCanada (24 GtCO~2~). The
per-capita order is: Luxembourg, USA, United Kingdom, Czech Republic,
Belgium, Germany,Estonia, Qatar, and Canada.

–*Some countries, including Britain, have committed to at least a 60%
reduction in greenhouse-gas emissions by 2050*.Indeed, as I write,
Britain’s commitment is being increased to an 80% reduction relative to
1990 levels.

15*Figure 1.8*. In the lower scenario, the chance that the temperature
rise will exceed 2°C is estimated to be 9–26%; thecumulative carbon
emissions from 2007 onwards are 309 GtC; CO~2~ concentrations reach a
peak of 410ppm, CO~2~econcentrations peak at 421ppm, and in 2100 CO~2~
concentrations fall back to 355ppm. In the upper scenario, thechance of
exceeding 2°C is estimated to be 16–43%; the cumulative carbon emissions
from 2007 onwards are 415 GtC;CO~2~ concentrations reach a peak of 425
ppm, CO~2~e concentrations peak at 435 ppm, and in 2100 CO~2~
concentrationsfall back to 380 ppm. See also
hdr.undp.org/en/reports/global/hdr2007-2008/.

16*there are many other helpful sources on the internet*. I recommend,
for example: BP’s *Statistical Review of World**Energy* [yyxq2m], the
Sustainable Development Commission www.sd-commission.org.uk, the Danish
Wind IndustryAssociation www.windpower.org, Environmentalists For
Nuclear Energy www.ecolo.org, Wind Energy Department,Risø University
www.risoe.dk/vea, DEFRA www.defra.gov.uk/environment/statistics,
especially the book *Avoid-**ing Dangerous Climate Change* [dzcqq], the
Pembina Institute www.pembina.org/publications.asp, and the DTI
(nowknown as BERR) www.dti.gov.uk/publications/.

17*factual assertions and ethical assertions*... Ethical assertions are
also known as “normative claims” or “value judg-ments,” and factual
assertions are known as “positive claims.” Ethical assertions usually
contain verbs like “should”and “must,” or adjectives like “fair,”
“right,” and “wrong.” For helpful further reading see Dessler and Parson
(2006).

18*Gordon Brown*. On 10th September, 2005, Gordon Brown said the high
price of fuel posed a signiﬁcant risk to theEuropean economy and to
global growth, and urged OPEC to raise oil production. Again, six months
later, hesaid “we need ... more production, more drilling, more
investment, more petrochemical investment” (22nd April,2006) [y98ys5].
Let me temper this criticism of Gordon Brown by praising one of his more
recent initiatives, namelythe promotion of electric vehicles and plug-in
hybrids. As you’ll see later, one of this book’s conclusions is
thatelectriﬁcation of most transport is a good part of a plan for
getting off fossil fuels.

2   The balance sheet {.lightblue}
=====================

> Nature cannot be fooledRichard Feynman

Let’s talk about energy consumption and energy production. At the
mo-ment, most of the energy the developed world consumes is produced
fromfossil fuels; that’s not sustainable. Exactly how long we could keep
liv-ing on fossil fuels is an interesting question, but it’s not the
question we’lladdress in this book. I want to think about *living
without fossil fuels*.

We’re going to make two stacks. In the left-hand, red stack we will
addup our energy consumption, and in the right-hand, green stack, we’ll
addup sustainable energy production. We’ll assemble the two stacks
gradually,adding items one at a time as we discuss them.

The question addressed in this book is “can we *conceivably* live
sustain-ably?” So, we will add up all *conceivable* sustainable energy
sources andput them in the right-hand, green stack.

In the left-hand, red stack, we’ll estimate the consumption of a
“typ-ical moderately-afﬂuent person;” I encourage you to tot up an
estimateof your *own* consumption, creating your own personalized
left-hand stacktoo. Later on we’ll also ﬁnd out the current *average*
energy consumption ofEuropeans and Americans.

![](figure325.png)

![](figure324.png)

As we estimate our consumption of energy for heating,
transportation,manufacturing, and so forth, the aim is not only to
compute a number forthe left-hand stack of our balance sheet, but also
to understand what eachnumber depends on, and how susceptible to
modiﬁcation it is.

In the right-hand, green stack, we’ll add up the sustainable produc-tion
estimates for the United Kingdom. This will allow us to answer
thequestion “can the UK conceivably live on its own renewables?”

Whether the sustainable energy sources that we put in the
right-handstack are *economically* feasible is an important question,
but let’s leave thatquestion to one side, and just add up the two stacks
ﬁrst. Sometimes peo-ple focus too much on economic feasibility and they
miss the big picture.For example, people discuss “is wind cheaper than
nuclear?” and forgetto ask “how *much* wind is available?” or “how much
uranium is left?”

The outcome when we add everything up might look like this:

![](figure326.png)

If we ﬁnd consumption is much less than conceivable sustainable
pro-duction, then we can say “good, *maybe* we can live sustainably;
let’s lookinto the economic, social, and environmental costs of the
sustainable al-ternatives, and ﬁgure out which of them deserve the most
research anddevelopment; if we do a good job, there *might* not be an
energy crisis.”

On the other hand, the outcome of our sums might look like this:

![](figure327.png)

– a much bleaker picture. This picture says “it doesn’t matter what the

economics of sustainable power are: there’s simply *not enough*
sustainablepower to support our current lifestyle; massive change is
coming.”

Energy and power
----------------

Most discussions of energy consumption and production are
confusingbecause of the proliferation of *units*in which energy and
power are mea-sured, from “tons of oil equivalent” to “terawatt-hours”
(TWh) and “exa-joules” (EJ). Nobody but a specialist has a feeling for
what “a barrel of oil”or “a million BTUs” means in human terms. In this
book, we’ll expresseverything in a single set of personal units that
everyone can relate to.

The unit of **energy** I have chosen is the kilowatt-hour (kWh).
Thisquantity is called “one unit” on electricity bills, and it costs a
domestic userabout 10p in the UK in 2008. As we’ll see, most individual
daily choicesinvolve amounts of energy equal to small numbers of
kilowatt-hours.

When we discuss **powers** (rates at which we use or produce energy),the
main unit will be the kilowatt-hour per day (kWh/d). We’ll also
occa-sionally use the watt (40 W ≈ 1kWh/d) and the kilowatt (1 kW = 1000
W= 24 kWh/d), as I’ll explain below. The kilowatt-hour per day is a
nicehuman-sized unit: most personal energy-guzzling activities guzzle at
arate of a small number of kilowatt-hours per day. For example, one 40
Wlightbulb, kept switched on all the time, uses **one** kilowatt-hour
per day.Some electricity companies include graphs in their electricity
bills, show-ing energy consumption in kilowatt-hours per day. I’ll use
the same unitfor all forms of power, not just electricity. Petrol
consumption, gas con-sumption, coal consumption: I’ll measure all these
powers in kilowatt-hours per day. Let me make this clear: for some
people, the word “power”means only *electrical* energy consumption. But
this book concerns *all* formsof energy consumption and production, and
I will use the word “power”for all of them.

One kilowatt-hour per day is roughly the power you could get fromone
human servant. The number of kilowatt-hours per day you use is thusthe
effective number of servants you have working for you.

People use the two terms energy and power interchangeably in ordi-nary
speech, but in this book we must stick rigorously to their
scientiﬁcdeﬁnitions. *Power is the rate at which something uses energy*.

Maybe a good way to explain energy and power is by an analogy withwater
and water-ﬂow from taps. If you want a drink of water, you want
a*volume* of water – one litre, perhaps (if you’re thirsty). When you
turn on atap, you create a *ﬂow* of water – one litre per minute, say,
if the tap yieldsonly a trickle; or 10 litres per minute, from a more
generous tap. You canget the same volume (one litre) either by running
the trickling tap for oneminute, or by running the generous tap for one
tenth of a minute. The*volume* delivered in a particular time is equal
to the *ﬂow* multiplied by the

![](figure18.png)

Figure 2.1. Distinguishing energy andpower. Each of these 60W light
bulbshas a power of 60W when switchedon; it doesn’t have an “energy”
of60W. The bulb uses 60W of electricalpower when it’s on; it emits 60 W
ofpower in the form of light and heat(mainly the latter).

volumeis measured inlitres

ﬂowis measured inlitres per minute

energyis measured inkWh

poweris measured inkWh per day

*time:*

volume = ﬂow × time.

We say that a *ﬂow* is a *rate* at which *volume* is delivered. If you
know thevolume delivered in a particular time, you get the ﬂow by
dividing thevolume by the time:

![](figure7.png)

Here’s the connection to energy and power. *Energy* is like water
*volume*:*power* is like water *ﬂow*. For example, whenever a toaster is
switched on, itstarts to consume *power* at a rate of one kilowatt. It
continues to consumeone kilowatt until it is switched off. To put it
another way, the toaster (ifit’s left on permanently) consumes one
kilowatt-hour (kWh) of energy perhour; it also consumes 24
kilowatt-hours per day.

The longer the toaster is on, the more energy it uses. You can work
outthe energy used by a particular activity by multiplying the power by
theduration:

energy= power × time.

The joule is the standard international unit of energy, but sadly it’s
fartoo small to work with. The kilowatt-hour is equal to 3.6 million
joules (3.6megajoules).

Powers are so useful and important, they have something that waterﬂows
don’t have: they have their own special units. When we talk of aﬂow, we
might measure it in “litres per minute,” “gallons per hour,”
or“cubic-metres per second;” these units’ names make clear that the ﬂow
is“a volume per unit time.” A power of *one joule per second* is called
*one watt*.1000 joules per second is called one kilowatt. Let’s get the
terminologystraight: the toaster uses one kilowatt. It doesn’t use “one
kilowatt per sec-ond.” The “per second” is already built in to the
deﬁnition of the kilowatt:one kilowatt means “one kilojoule per second.”
Similarly we say “a nuclearpower station generates one gigawatt.” One
gigawatt, by the way, is onebillion watts, one million kilowatts, or
1000 megawatts. So one gigawattis a million toasters. And the “g”s in
gigawatt are pronounced hard, thesame as in “giggle.” And, while I’m
tapping the blackboard, we capital-ize the “g” and “w” in “gigawatt”
only when we write the abbreviation“GW.”

Please, never, ever say “one kilowatt per second,” “one kilowatt
perhour,” or “one kilowatt per day;” none of these is a valid measure of
power.The urge that people have to say “per something” when talking
about theirtoasters is one of the reasons I decided to use the
“kilowatt-hour per day”as my unit of power. I’m sorry that it’s a bit
cumbersome to say and towrite.

Here’s one last thing to make clear: if I say “someone used a
gigawatt-hour of energy,” I am simply telling you*how much* energy they
used, not*how fast* they used it. Talking about a gigawatt-hour
*doesn’t* imply the

energyis measured inkWhorMJ

poweris measured inkWh per dayorkWorW (watts)orMW (megawatts)orGW
(gigawatts)orTW (terawatts)

energy was used *in one hour*. You could use a gigawatt-hour of energy
byswitching on one million toasters for one hour, or by switching on
1000toasters for 1000 hours.

As I said, I’ll usually quote powers in kWh/d *per person*. One
reasonfor liking these personal units is that it makes it much easier to
move fromtalking about the UK to talking about other countries or
regions. For ex-ample, imagine we are discussing waste incineration and
we learn thatUK waste incineration delivers a power of 7 TWh per year
and that Den-mark’s waste incineration delivers 10 TWh per year. Does
this help us saywhether Denmark incinerates “more” waste than the UK?
While the totalpower produced from waste in each country may be
interesting, I thinkthat what we usually want to know is the waste
incineration *per person*.(For the record, that is: Denmark, 5 kWh/d per
person; UK, 0.3 kWh/dper person. So Danes incinerate about 13 times as
much waste as Brits.) Tosave ink, I’ll sometimes abbreviate “per person”
to “/p”. By discussing ev-erything per-person from the outset, we end up
with a more transportablebook, one that will hopefully be useful for
sustainable energy discussionsworldwide.

Picky details
-------------

#### Isn’t energy conserved? We talk about “using” energy, but doesn’t one ofthe laws of nature say that energy can’t be created or destroyed?

Yes, I’m being imprecise. This is really a book about *entropy* – a
trickierthing to explain. When we “use up” one kilojoule of energy, what
we’rereally doing is taking one kilojoule of energy in a form that has
*low entropy*(for example, electricity), and *converting* it into an
exactly equal amountof energy in another form, usually one that has much
higher entropy (forexample, hot air or hot water). When we’ve “used” the
energy, it’s stillthere; but we normally can’t “use” the energy over and
over again, becauseonly *low entropy* energy is “useful” to us.
Sometimes these different gradesof energy are distinguished by adding a
label to the units: one kWh(e) isone kilowatt-hour of electrical energy
– the highest grade of energy. OnekWh(th) is one kilowatt-hour of
thermal energy – for example the energyin ten litres of boiling-hot
water. Energy lurking in higher-temperaturethings is more useful (lower
entropy) than energy in tepid things. A thirdgrade of energy is chemical
energy. Chemical energy is high-grade energylike electricity.

It’s a convenient but sloppy shorthand to talk about the energy
ratherthan the entropy, and that is what we’ll do most of the time in
this book.Occasionally, we’ll have to smarten up this sloppiness; for
example, whenwe discuss refrigeration, power stations, heat pumps, or
geothermal power.

#### Are you comparing apples and oranges? Is it valid to compare different

1TWh (one terawatt-hour) is equal toone billion kWh.

#### forms of energy such as the chemical energy that is fed into a petrol-powered car and the electricity from a wind turbine?

By comparing consumed energy with conceivable produced energy, I donot
wish to imply that all forms of energy are equivalent and
interchange-able. The electrical energy produced by a wind turbine is of
no use toa petrol engine; and petrol is no use if you want to power a
television.In principle, energy can be converted from one form to
another, thoughconversion entails losses. Fossil-fuel power stations,
for example, guzzle*chemical energy* and produce *electricity* (with an
efﬁciency of 40% or so).And aluminium plants guzzle *electrical energy*
to create a product withhigh *chemical energy* – aluminium (with an
efﬁciency of 30% or so).

In some summaries of energy production and consumption, all the
dif-ferent forms of energy are put into the same units, but multipliers
areintroduced, rating electrical energy from hydroelectricity for
example asbeing worth 2.5 times more than the chemical energy in oil.
This bumpingup of electricity’s effective energy value can be justiﬁed
by saying, “well,1 kWh of electricity is equivalent to 2.5 kWh of oil,
because if we put thatmuch oil into a standard power station it would
deliver 40% of 2.5 kWh,which is 1 kWh of electricity.” In this book,
however, I will usually use aone-to-one conversion rate when comparing
different forms of energy. Itis *not* the case that 2.5 kWh of oil is
inescapably equivalent to 1 kWh ofelectricity; that just happens to be
the perceived exchange rate in a world-view where oil is used to make
electricity. Yes, conversion of chemicalenergy to electrical energy is
done with this particular inefﬁcient exchangerate. But electrical energy
can also be converted to chemical energy. In analternative world
(perhaps not far-off) with relatively plentiful electricityand little
oil, we might use electricity to make liquid fuels; in that worldwe
would surely not use the same exchange rate – each kWh of gasolinewould
then cost us something like 3 kWh of electricity! I think the
timelessand scientiﬁc way to summarize and compare energies is to hold 1
kWhof chemical energy equivalent to 1 kWh of electricity. My choice to
usethis one-to-one conversion rate means that some of my sums will look
abit different from other people’s. (For example, BP’s *Statistical
Review ofWorld Energy* rates 1 kWh of electricity as equivalent to
100/38 ≈ 2.6 kWhof oil; on the other hand, the government’s *Digest of
UK Energy Statistics*uses the same one-to-one conversion rate as me.)
And I emphasize again,this choice does not imply that I’m suggesting you
could convert eitherform of energy directly into the other. Converting
chemical energy intoelectrical energy always wastes energy, and so does
converting electricalinto chemical energy.

Physics and equations
---------------------

Throughout the book, my aim is not only to work out numbers
indicatingour current energy consumption and conceivable sustainable
production,

but also to make clear *what these numbers depend on*. Understanding
whatthe numbers depend on is essential if we are to choose sensible
policiesto change any of the numbers. Only if we understand the physics
behindenergy consumption and energy production can we assess assertions
suchas “cars waste 99% of the energy they consume; we could redesign
cars sothat they use 100 times less energy.” Is this assertion true? To
explain theanswer, I will need to use equations like

![ ](figure10.png)

However, I recognize that to many readers, such formulae are a foreign
lan-guage. So, here’s my promise: *I’ll keep all this foreign-language
stuff in techni-**cal chapters at the end of the book*. Any reader with
a high-school/secondary-school qualiﬁcation in maths, physics, or
chemistry should enjoy thesetechnical chapters. The main thread of the
book (from page 2 to page 250)is intended to be accessible to everyone
who can add, multiply, and divide.It is especially aimed at our dear
elected and unelected representatives, theMembers of Parliament.

One last point, before we get rolling: I don’t know everything
aboutenergy. I don’t have all the answers, and the numbers I offer are
open torevision and correction. (Indeed I expect corrections and will
publish themon the book’s website.) The one thing I *am* sure of is that
the answers toour sustainable energy questions will involve *numbers* ;
any sane discussionof sustainable energy requires numbers. This book’s
got ’em, and it showshow to handle them. I hope you enjoy it!

Notes and further reading
-------------------------

page no.

25*The “per second” is already built in to the deﬁnition of the
kilowatt.* Other examples of units that, like the watt, alreadyhave a
“per time” built in are the knot – “our yacht’s speed was ten knots!” (a
knot is one nautical mile *per* hour); thehertz – “I could hear a
buzzing at 50 hertz” (one hertz is a frequency of one cycle *per*
second); the ampere – “the fuseblows when the current is higher than 13
amps” (*not* 13 amps per second); and the horsepower – “that stinking
enginedelivers 50 horsepower” (*not* 50 horsepower per second, nor 50
horsepower per hour, nor 50 horsepower per day, just50 horsepower).

–*Please, never, ever say “one kilowatt per second.”* There are speciﬁc,
rare exceptions to this rule. If talking about agrowth in demand for
power, we might say “British demand is growing at one gigawatt per
year.” In Chapter 26 whenI discuss ﬂuctuations in wind power, I will say
“one morning, the power delivered by Irish windmills fell at a rate of84
MW per hour.” Please take care! Just one accidental syllable can lead to
confusion: for example, your electricitymeter’s reading is in
kilowatt-hours (kWh), *not* ‘kilowatts-per-hour’.

I’ve provided a chart on p368 to help you translate between kWh per day
per person and the other major units in whichpowers are discussed.

3   Cars {.red}
========

For our first chapter on consumption, let’s study that icon of modern
civi-lization: the car with a lone person in it.

How much power does a regular car-user consume? Once we know
theconversion rates, it’s simple arithmetic:

![](figure12.png)

For the **distance travelled per day**, let’s use 50 km (30 miles).

For the **distance per unit of fuel**, also known as the **economy** of
thecar, let’s use 33 miles per UK gallon (taken from an advertisement
for afamily car):

33 miles per imperial gallon ≈ 12 km per litre.

(The symbol ≈ means “is approximately equal to.”)

What about the **energy per unit of fuel** (also called the **calorific
value**or **energy density**)? Instead of looking it up, it’s fun to
estimate this sort ofquantity by a bit of lateral thinking. Automobile
fuels (whether diesel orpetrol) are all hydrocarbons; and hydrocarbons
can also be found on ourbreakfast table, with the calorific value
conveniently written on the side:roughly 8 kWh per kg (figure 3.2).
Since we’ve estimated the economy ofthe car in miles per unit *volume*
of fuel, we need to express the calorificvalue as an energy per unit
*volume*. To turn our fuel’s “8 kWh per kg” (anenergy per unit *mass*)
into an energy per unit volume, we need to knowthe density of the fuel.
What’s the density of butter? Well, butter just floatson water, as do
fuel-spills, so its density must be a little less than water’s,which is
1 kg per litre. If we guess a density of 0.8 kg per litre, we obtain
acalorific value of:

8 kWh per kg × 0.8 kg per litre ≈ 7 kWh per litre.

Rather than willfully perpetuate an inaccurate estimate, let’s switch to
theactual value, for petrol, of 10 kWh per litre.

![](figure16.png)

Congratulations! We’ve made our first estimate of consumption. I’ve
dis-played this estimate in the left-hand stack in figure 3.3. The red
box’sheight represents 40 kWh per day per person.

![](figure19.png)

Figure 3.1. Cars. A red BMW dwarfedby a spaceship from the planetDorkon.

![](figure20.png)

Figure 3.2. Want to know the energyin car fuel? Look at the label on
apack of butter or margarine. Thecalorific value is 3000 kJ per 100 g,
orabout 8 kWh per kg.

![](figure21.png)

Figure 3.3. Chapter 3’s conclusion: atypical car-driver uses about 40
kWhper day.

This is the estimate for a typical car-driver driving a typical car
today.Later chapters will discuss the *average* consumption of all the
people inBritain, taking into account the fact that not everyone drives.
We’ll alsodiscuss in Part II what the consumption *could* be, with the
help of othertechnologies such as electric cars.

Why does the car deliver 33 miles per gallon? Where’s that energygoing?
Could we manufacture cars that do 3300 miles per gallon? If we
areinterested in trying to reduce cars’ consumption, we need to
understandthe physics behind cars’ consumption. These questions are
answered inthe accompanying technical chapter A (p254), which provides a
cartoontheory of cars’ consumption. I encourage you to read the
technical chaptersif formulae like ^1^⁄~2~mv^2^ don’t give you medical
problems.

Chapter 3’s conclusion: a typical car-driver uses about 40 kWh per
day.Next we need to get the sustainable-production stack going, so we
havesomething to compare this estimate with.

Queries
-------

#### What about the energy-cost of producing the car’s fuel?

Good point. When I estimate the energy consumed by a particularactivity,
I tend to choose a fairly tight “boundary” around the activity.This
choice makes the estimation easier, but I agree that it’s a good ideato
try to estimate the full energy impact of an activity. It’s been
estimatedthat making each unit of petrol requires an input of 1.4 units
of oil andother primary fuels (Treloar et al., 2004).

#### What about the energy-cost of manufacturing the car?

Yes, that cost fell outside the boundary of this calculation too.
We’lltalk about car-making in Chapter 15.

Notes and further reading
-------------------------

page no.

29 *For the distance travelled per day, let’s use 50 km.* This
corresponds to18 000 km (11 000 miles) per year. Roughly half of the
British populationdrive to work. The total amount of car travel in the
UK is 686 billionpassenger-km per year, which corresponds to an “average
distance travelledby car per British person” of 30 km per day. Source:
Department for Trans-port [5647rh]. As I said on p22, I aim to estimate
the consumption of a“typical moderately-affluent person” – the
consumption that many peopleaspire to. Some people don’t drive much. In
this chapter, I want to estimatethe energy consumed by someone who
chooses to drive, rather than deper-sonalize the answer by reporting the
UK average, which mixes together thedrivers and non-drivers. If I said
“the average use of energy for car driving

![](figure22.png)

Figure 3.4. How British people travelto work, according to the 2001
census.

in the UK is 24 kWh/d per person,” I bet some people would
misunderstandand say: “I’m a car driver so I guess I use 24
kWh/d.”[^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#31)

29*... let’s use 33 miles per UK gallon.* In the European language, this
is 8.6 litresper 100 km. 33 miles per gallon was the average for UK cars
in 2005 [27jdc5].Petrol cars have an average fuel consumption of 31 mpg;
diesel cars, 39 mpg;new petrol cars (less than two years old), 32 mpg
(Dept. for Transport, 2007).Honda, “the most fuel-efficient auto company
in America,” records that itsfleet of new cars sold in 2005 has an
average top-level fuel economy of 35miles per UK gallon [28abpm].

29*Let’s guess a density of 0.8 kg per litre.* Petrol’s density is
0.737. Diesel’s is0.820–0.950 [nmn4l].

–*... the actual value of 10 kWh per litre.* ORNL [2hcgdh] provide the
followingcalorific values: diesel: 10.7 kWh/l; jet fuel: 10.4 kWh/l;
petrol: 9.7 kWh/l.When looking up calorific values, you’ll find “gross
calorific value” and“net calorific value” listed (also known as “high
heat value” and “low heatvalue”). These differ by only 6% for motor
fuels, so it’s not crucial to distinguishthem here, but let me explain
anyway. The gross calorific value is theactual chemical energy released
when the fuel is burned. One of the productsof combustion is water, and
in most engines and power stations, partof the energy goes into
vaporizing this water. The net calorific value measureshow much energy
is left over assuming this energy of vaporization isdiscarded and
wasted.When we ask “how much energy does my lifestyle consume?” the
grosscalorific value is the right quantity to use. The net calorific
value, on theother hand, is of interest to a power station engineer, who
needs to decidewhich fuel to burn in his power station. Throughout this
book I’ve tried touse gross calorific values.A final note for
party-pooping pedants who say “butter is not a hydrocarbon”:OK, butter
is not a pure hydrocarbon; but it’s a good approximation tosay that the
main component of butter is long hydrocarbon chains, just likepetrol.
The proof of the pudding is, this approximation got us within 30%of the
correct answer. Welcome to guerrilla physics.

![](figure23.png)

![](figure24.png)

Ch4 Page 32: Sustainable Energy - without the hot air

4   Wind {.green}
========

> The UK has the best wind resources in Europe. Sustainable Development
> Commission

> Wind farms will devastate the countryside pointlessly. James Lovelock

How much wind power could we plausibly generate?

We can make an estimate of the potential of *on-shore* (land-based)
windin the United Kingdom by multiplying the average power per unit
land-area of a wind farm by the area per person in the UK:

power per person = wind power per unit area × area per person.

Chapter B (p263) explains how to estimate the power per unit area of
awind farm in the UK. If the typical windspeed is 6 m/s (13 miles per
hour,or 22 km/h), the power per unit area of wind farm is about 2
W/m^2^.

![](figure25.png)

This figure of 6 m/s is probably an over-estimate for many locations
inBritain. For example, figure 4.1 shows daily average windspeeds in
Cam-bridge during 2006. The daily average speed reached 6 m/s on only
about30 days of the year – see figure 4.6 for a histogram. But some
spots dohave windspeeds above 6 m/s – for example, the summit of
Cairngorm inScotland (figure 4.2).

Plugging in the British population density: 250 people per square
kilo-metre, or 4000 square metres per person, we find that wind power
could

![](figure26.png)

![](figure333.png)

Figure 4.1. Cambridge mean wind speed in metres per second, daily (red
line), and half-hourly (blue line) during 2006. See also figure 4.6.

![](figure400.png)

Figure 4.2. Cairngorm mean wind speed in metres per second, during six
months of 2006.

generate

2 W/m^2^ ×4000 m^2^/person = 8000 W per person,

if wind turbines were packed across the *whole* country, and assuming2
W/m^2^ is the correct power per unit area. Converting to our
favouritepower units, that’s 200 kWh/d per person.

Let’s be realistic. What fraction of the country can we really
imaginecovering with windmills? Maybe 10%? Then we conclude: if we
coveredthe windiest 10% of the country with windmills (delivering 2
W/m^2^), wewould be able to generate 20 kWh/d per person, which is
***half*** of the powerused by driving an average fossil-fuel car 50 km
per day.

Britain’s onshore wind energy resource may be “huge,” but it’s
evi-dently not as huge as our huge consumption. We’ll come to offshore
windlater.

I should emphasize how generous an assumption I’m making. Let’scompare
this estimate of British wind potential with current installed windpower
worldwide. The windmills that would be required to provide theUK with 20
kWh/d per person amount to 50 times the entire wind hardwareof Denmark;
7 times all the wind farms of Germany; and double theentire fleet of all
wind turbines in the world.

Please don’t misunderstand me. Am I saying that we shouldn’t
botherbuilding wind farms? Not at all. I’m simply trying to convey a
helpfulfact, namely that if we want wind power to truly make a
difference, thewind farms must cover a very large area.

This conclusion – that the maximum contribution of onshore wind, al-beit
“huge,” is much less than our consumption – is important, so let’scheck
the key figure, the assumed power per unit area of wind farm(2 W/m^2^),
against a real UK wind farm.

The Whitelee wind farm being built near Glasgow in Scotland has
140turbines with a combined *peak* capacity of 322 MW in an area of 55
km^2^.That’s 6 W/m^2^, *peak*. The average power produced is smaller
because theturbines don’t run at peak output all the time. The ratio of
the averagepower to the peak power is called the “load factor” or
“capacity factor,”and it varies from site to site, and with the choice
of hardware ploppedon the site; a typical factor for a good site with
modern turbines is 30%.If we assume Whitelee has a load factor of 33%
then the average powerproduction per unit land area is 2 W/m^2^ –
exactly the same as the powerdensity we assumed above.

![](figure27.png)

Figure 4.3. Chapter 4’s conclusion: the maximum plausible production
from on-shore windmills in the United Kingdom is 20 kWh per day per
person.

![](figure401.png)

Table 4.4. Facts worth remembering:wind farms.

![](figure402.png)

Table 4.5. Facts worth remembering:population density. See page 338
formore population densities.

![](figure28.png)

Queries
-------

#### Wind turbines are getting bigger all the time. Do bigger wind turbineschange this chapter’s answer?

Chapter B explains. Bigger wind turbines deliver financial economiesof
scale, but they don’t greatly increase the total power per unit land
area,because bigger windmills have to be spaced further apart. A wind
farmthat’s twice as tall will deliver roughly 30% more power.

#### Wind power fluctuates all the time. Surely that makes wind less useful?

Maybe. We’ll come back to this issue in Chapter 26, where we’ll lookat
wind’s intermittency and discuss several possible solutions to this
problem,including energy storage and demand management.

Notes and further reading
-------------------------

page no.

32*Figure 4.1 and figure 4.6.* Cambridge wind data are from the Digital
Technology Group, Computer Laboratory, Cambridge[vxhhj]. The weather
station is on the roof of the Gates building, roughly 10 m high. Wind
speeds at a height of50 m are usually about 25% bigger. Cairngorm data
(*figure 4.2*) are from Heriot–Watt University Physics
Department[tdvml].

33*The windmills required to provide the UK with 20 kWh/d per person are
50 times the entire wind power of Denmark.*Assuming a load factor of
33%, an average power of 20 kWh/d per person requires an installed
capacity of 150 GW.At the end of 2006, Denmark had an installed capacity
of 3.1 GW; Germany had 20.6 GW. The world total was 74 GW(wwindea.org).
Incidentally, the load factor of the Danish wind fleet was 22% in 2006,
and the average power itdelivered was 3 kWh/d per person.

Figure 4.6. Histogram of Cambridgeaverage wind speed in metres
persecond: daily averages (left), andhalf-hourly averages (right).

5   Planes {.red}
==========

Imagine that you make one intercontinental trip per year by plane.
Howmuch energy does that cost?

A Boeing 747-400 with 240 000 litres of fuel carries 416 passengers
about8 800 miles (14 200 km). And fuel’s calorific value is 10 kWh per
litre. (Welearned that in Chapter 3.) So the energy cost of one
full-distance roundtripon such a plane, if divided equally among the
passengers, is

2 × 240 000 litre

× 10 kWh/litre ≈ 12 000 kWh per passenger

416 passengers

If you make one such trip per year, then your average energy
consumptionper day is

12 000 kWh

≈ 33 kWh/day

365 days

14 200 km is a little further than London to Cape Town (10 000 km)
andLondon to Los Angeles (9000km), so I think we’ve slightly
overestimatedthe distance of a typical long-range intercontinental trip;
but we’ve alsooverestimated the fullness of the plane, and the energy
cost per person ismore if the plane’s not full. Scaling down by 10 000
km/14 200 km to get anestimate for Cape Town, then up again by 100/80 to
allow for the plane’sbeing 80% full, we arrive at 29 kWh per day. For
ease of memorization, I’llround this up to 30 kWh per day.

Let’s make clear what this means. Flying once per year has an energycost
slightly bigger than leaving a 1 kW electric fire on, non-stop, 24
hoursa day, all year.

Just as Chapter 3, in which we estimated consumption by cars,
wasaccompanied by Chapter A, offering a model of where the energy goes
incars, this chapter’s technical partner (Chapter C, p269), discusses
wherethe energy goes in planes. Chapter C allows us to answer questions
suchas “would air travel consume significantly less energy if we
travelled inslower planes?” The answer is **no**: in contrast to wheeled
vehicles, whichcan get more efficient the slower they go, planes are
already almost asenergy-efficient as they could possibly be. Planes
unavoidably have to useenergy for two reasons: they have to throw air
down in order to stay up,and they need energy to overcome air
resistance. No redesign of a planeis going to radically improve its
efficiency. A 10% improvement? Yes,possible. A doubling of efficiency?
I’d eat my complimentary socks.

Queries
-------

#### Aren’t turboprop aircraft far more energy-efficient?

No. The “comfortably greener” Bombardier Q400 NextGen, “the
mosttechnologically advanced turboprop in the world,” according to its
manu-

![](figure334.png)

![](figure29.png)

Figure 5.1. Taking oneintercontinental trip per year usesabout 30 kWh
per day.

![](figure30.png)

Figure 5.2. Bombardier Q400 NextGen www.q400.com

facturers [www.q400.com], uses 3.81 litres per 100 passenger-km (at a
cruisespeed of 667 km/h), which is an energy cost of 38 kWh per 100
p-km. Thefull 747 has an energy cost of 42 kWh per 100 p-km. So both
planes aretwice as fuel-efficient as a single-occupancy car. (The car
I’m assuminghere is the average European car that we discussed in
Chapter 3.)

#### Is flying extra-bad for climate change in some way?

Yes, that’s the experts’ view, though uncertainty remains about
thistopic [3fbufz]. Flying creates other greenhouse gases in addition to
CO~2~,such as water and ozone, and indirect greenhouse gases, such as
nitrousoxides. If you want to estimate your carbon footprint in tons of
CO~2~-equivalent, then you should take the actual CO~2~ emissions of
your flightsand bump them up two- or three-fold. This book’s diagrams
don’t includethat multiplier because here we are focusing on our
*energy* balance sheet.

> The best thing we can do with environmentalists is shoot them.Michael
> O’Leary, CEO of Ryanair [3asmgy]

Notes and further reading
-------------------------

page no.

35*Boeing 747-400* – data are from [9ehws].Planes today are not
completely full. Airlines are proud if their average full-ness is 80%.
Easyjet planes are 85% full on average. (Source: thelondonpaperTuesday
16th January, 2007.) An 80%-full 747 uses about 53 kWh per
100passenger-km.What about short-haul flights? In 2007, Ryanair,
“Europe’s greenest airline,”delivered transportation at a cost of 37 kWh
per 100 p-km [3exmgv]. Thismeans that flying across Europe with Ryanair
has much the same energycost as having all the passengers drive to their
destination in cars, two to acar. (For an indication of what other
airlines might be delivering, Ryanair’sfuel burn rate in 2000, before
their environment-friendly investments, wasabove 73 kWh per 100 p-km.)
London to Rome is 1430 km; London to Malagais 1735 km. So a round-trip
to Rome with the greenest airline has an energycost of 1050 kWh, and a
round-trip to Malaga costs 1270 kWh. If you popover to Rome and to
Malaga once per year, your average power consumptionis 6.3 kWh/d with
the greenest airline, and perhaps 12 kWh/d with a lessgreen one.What
about frequent flyers? To get a silver frequent flyer card from an
in-tercontinental airline, it seems one must fly around 25 000 miles per
year ineconomy class. That’s about 60 kWh per day, if we scale up the
openingnumbers from this chapter and assume planes are 80% full.Here are
some additional figures from the Intergovernmental Panel on Cli-mate
Change [yrnmum]: a full 747-400 travelling 10 000 km with
low-densityseating (262 seats) has an energy consumption of 50 kWh per
100 p-km. Ina high-density seating configuration (568 seats) and
travelling 4000 km, the

![](figure31.png)

Figure 5.4. Ryanair Boeing 737-800. Photograph by Adrian Pingstone.

energy per distance(kWh per 100 p-km)

Car (4 occupants)

20

Ryanair’s planes, year 2007

37

Bombardier Q400, full

38

747, full

42

747, 80% full

53

Ryanair's planes, year 2000

73

Car (1 occupant)

80

Table 5.3. Passenger transport efficiencies, expressed as energy
required per 100 passenger-km.

same plane has an energy consumption of 22 kWh per 100 p-km. A
short-haul Tupolev-154 travelling 2235 km with 70% of its 164 seats
occupied con-sumes 80 kWh per 100 p-km.

35*No redesign of a plane is going to radically improve its efficiency.*
Actually,the Advisory Council for Aerospace Research in Europe (ACARE)
targetis for an overall 50% reduction in fuel burned per passenger-km by
2020(relative to a 2000 baseline), with 15–20% improvement expected in
engineefficiency. As of 2006, Rolls Royce is half way to this engine
target [36w5gz].Dennis Bushnell, chief scientist at NASA’s Langley
Research Center, seems toagree with my overall assessment of prospects
for efficiency improvementsin aviation. The aviation industry is mature.
“There is not much left to gainexcept by the glacial accretion of a per
cent here and there over long timeperiods.” (New Scientist, 24 February
2007, page 33.)The radically reshaped “Silent Aircraft”
[silentaircraft.org/sax40], if itwere built, is predicted to be 16% more
efficient than a conventional-shapedplane (Nickol, 2008).If the ACARE
target is reached, it’s presumably going to be thanks mostlyto having
fuller planes and better air-traffic management.

![](figure32.png)

Figure 5.5. Two short-haul trips on the greenest short-haul airline: 6.3
kWh/d. Flying enough to qualify for silver frequent flyer status: 60
kWh/d.

6   Solar {.green}
=========

We are estimating how our consumption stacks up against
conceivablesustainable production. In the last three chapters we found
car-driving andplane-flying to be bigger than the plausible on-shore
wind-power potentialof the United Kingdom. Could solar power put
production back in thelead?

The power of raw sunshine at midday on a cloudless day is 1000W
persquare metre. That’s 1000 W per m^2^ of area oriented towards the
sun, notper m^2^ of land area. To get the power per m^2^ of *land area*
in Britain, wemust make several corrections. We need to compensate for
the tilt betweenthe sun and the land, which reduces the intensity of
midday sun to about60% of its value at the equator (figure 6.1). We also
lose out because it isnot midday all the time. On a cloud-free day in
March or September, theratio of the *average* intensity to the midday
intensity is about 32%. Finally,we lose power because of cloud cover. In
a typical UK location the sunshines during just 34% of daylight hours.

The combined effect of these three factors and the additional
compli-cation of the wobble of the seasons is that the average raw power
of sunshineper square metre of south-facing roof in Britain is roughly
110 W/m^2^,and the average raw power of sunshine per square metre of
flat ground isroughly 100 W/m^2^.

We can turn this raw power into useful power in four ways:

1.  Solar thermal: using the sunshine for direct heating of buildings
    orwater.
2.  Solar photovoltaic: generating electricity.
3.  Solar biomass: using trees, bacteria, algae, corn, soy beans, or
    oilseedto make energy fuels, chemicals, or building materials.
4.  Food: the same as solar biomass, except we shovel the plants
    intohumans or other animals.

(In a later chapter we’ll also visit a couple of other solar power
techniquesappropriate for use in deserts.)

Let’s make quick rough estimates of the maximum plausible powersthat
each of these routes could deliver. We’ll neglect their economic
costs,and the energy costs of manufacturing and maintaining the power
facili-ties.

Solar thermal
-------------

The simplest solar power technology is a panel making hot water.
Let’simagine we cover *all* south-facing roofs with solar thermal panels
– that

![](figure33.png)

Figure 6.1. Sunlight hitting the earth at midday on a spring or autumn
day. The density of sunlight per unit land area in Cambridge (latitude
52.) is about 60% of that at the equator.

![](figure34.png)

Figure 6.2. Average solar intensity in London and Edinburgh as a
function of time of year. The average intensity, per unit land area, is
100 W/m^2^.

![](figure35.png)

would be about 10 m^2^ of panels per person – and let’s assume these
are50%-efficient at turning the sunlight’s 110 W/m^2^ into hot water
(figure 6.3).

Multiplying

50% × 10 m^2^ × 110 W/m^2^

we find solar heating could deliver

13 kWh per day per person.

I colour this production box white in figure 6.4 to indicate that it
describesproduction of low-grade energy – hot water is not as valuable
as the highgradeelectrical energy that wind turbines produce. Heat can’t
be exportedto the electricity grid. If you don’t need it, then it’s
wasted. We should bearin mind that much of this captured heat would not
be in the right place.In cities, where many people live, residential
accommodation has less roofarea per person than the national average.
Furthermore, this power wouldbe delivered non-uniformly through the
year.

Solar photovoltaic
------------------

Photovoltaic (PV) panels convert sunlight into electricity. Typical
solarpanels have an efficiency of about 10%; expensive ones perform at
20%.(Fundamental physical laws limit the efficiency of photovoltaic
systems toat best 60% with perfect concentrating mirrors or lenses, and
45% withoutconcentration. A mass-produced device with efficiency greater
than 30%would be quite remarkable.) The average power delivered by
south-facing20%-efficient photovoltaic panels in Britain would be

20%× 110 W/m^2^ = 22 W/m^2^.

Figure 6.5 shows data to back up this number. Let’s give every person10
m^2^ of expensive (20%-efficient) solar panels and cover all
south-facingroofs. These will deliver

5 kWh per day per person.

Figure 6.3. Solar power generated by a 3 m^2^ hot-water panel (green),
and supplementary heat required (blue) to make hot water in the test
house of Viridian Solar. (The photograph shows a house with the same
model of panel on its roof.) The average solar power from 3 m^2^ was 3.8
kWh/d. The experiment simulated the hot-water consumption of an average
European household – 100 litres of hot (60°C) water per day. The 1.5–2
kWh/d gap between the total heat generated (black line, top) and the hot
water used (red line) is caused by heat-loss. The magenta line shows the
electrical power required to run the solar system. The average power per
unit area of these solar panels is 53 W/m^2^.

![](figure36.png)

Figure 6.4. Solar thermal: a 10 m^2^ array of thermal panels can deliver
(on average) about 13 kWh per day of thermal energy.

Since the area of all south-facing roofs is 10 m^2^ per person, there
certainlyisn’t space on our roofs for these photovoltaic panels as well
as the solarthermal panels of the last section. So we have to choose
whether to have thephotovoltaic contribution or the solar hot water
contribution. But I’ll justplop both these on the production stack
anyway. Incidentally, the presentcost of installing such photovoltaic
panels is about four times the cost ofinstalling solar thermal panels,
but they deliver only half as much energy,albeit high-grade energy
(electricity). So I’d advise a family thinking ofgoing solar to
investigate the solar thermal option first. The smartest solu-tion, at
least in sunny countries, is to make combined systems that deliverboth
electricity and hot water from a single installation. This is the
approachpioneered by Heliodynamics, who reduce the overall cost of
theirsystems by surrounding small high-grade gallium arsenide
photovoltaicunits with arrays of slowly-moving flat mirrors; the mirrors
focus the sun-light onto the photovoltaic units, which deliver both
electricity and hotwater; the hot water is generated by pumping water
past the back of thephotovoltaic units.

The conclusion so far: covering your south-facing roof at home
withphotovoltaics may provide enough juice to cover quite a big chunk of
yourpersonal average electricity consumption; but roofs are not big
enough tomake a huge dent in our total *energy* consumption. To do more
with PV,we need to step down to terra firma. The solar warriors in
figure 6.6 showthe way.

![](figure37.png)

![](figure38.png)

Figure 6.5. Solar photovoltaics: data from a 25-m^2^ array in
Cambridgeshire in 2006. The peak power delivered by this array is about
4 kW. The average, year-round, is 12 kWh per day. That’s 20 W per square
metre of panel.

Figure 6.6. Two solar warriors enjoying their photovoltaic system, which
powers their electric cars and home. The array of 120 panels (300 W
each, 2.2 m^2^ each) has an area of 268 m^2^, a peak output (allowing
for losses in DC–to–AC conversion) of 30.5 kW, and an average output –
in California, near Santa Cruz – of 5 kW (19 W/m^2^). Photo kindly
provided by Kenneth Adelman. www.solarwarrior.com

### Fantasy time: solar farming

If a breakthrough of solar technology occurs and the cost of
photovoltaicscame down enough that we could deploy panels all over the
countryside,what is the maximum conceivable production? Well, if we
covered 5% ofthe UK with 10%-efficient panels, we’d have

10% × 100 W/m^2^ × 200 m^2^ per person≈ 50 kWh/day/person.

I assumed only 10%-efficient panels, by the way, because I imagine
thatsolar panels would be mass-produced on such a scale only if they
werevery cheap, and it’s the lower-efficiency panels that will get cheap
first.The power density (the power per unit area) of such a solar farm
would be

10% × 100 W/m^2^ = 10 W/m^2^.

This power density is twice that of the Bavaria Solarpark (figure 6.7).

Could this flood of solar panels co-exist with the army of windmills
weimagined in Chapter 4? Yes, no problem: windmills cast little shadow,
andground-level solar panels have negligible effect on the wind. How
auda-cious is this plan? The solar power capacity required to deliver
this 50 kWhper day per person in the UK is more than 100 times all the
photovoltaicsin the whole world. So should I include the PV farm in my
sustainableproduction stack? I’m in two minds. At the start of this book
I said Iwanted to explore what the laws of physics say about the limits
of sus-tainable energy, assuming money is no object. On those grounds, I
shouldcertainly go ahead, industrialize the countryside, and push the PV
farmonto the stack. At the same time, I want to help people figure out
whatwe should be doing between *now* and 2050. And today, electricity
fromsolar farms would be four times as expensive as the market rate. So
I feela bit irresponsible as I include this estimate in the sustainable
productionstack in figure 6.9 – paving 5% of the UK with solar panels
seems beyondthe bounds of plausibility in so many ways. If we seriously
contemplateddoing such a thing, it would quite probably be better to put
the panels ina two-fold sunnier country and send some of the energy home
by powerlines. We’ll return to this idea in Chapter 25.

### Mythconceptions

#### Manufacturing a solar panel consumes more energy than itwill ever de-liver.

*False*. The energy yield ratio (the ratio of energy delivered by a
systemover its lifetime, to the energy required to make it) of a
roof-mounted,grid-connected solar system in Central Northern Europe is
4, for a systemwith a lifetime of 20 years (Richards and Watt, 2007);
and more than 7 in

![](figure39.png)

Figure 6.7. A solar photovoltaic farm: the 6.3 MW (peak) Solarpark in
Mühlhausen, Bavaria. Its average power per unit land area is expected to
be about 5 W/m^2^. Photo by SunPower.

![](figure40.png)

Figure 6.8. Land areas per person in Britain.

a sunnier spot such as Australia. (An energy yield ratio bigger than
onemeans that a system is A Good Thing, energy-wise.) Wind turbines with
alifetime of 20 years have an energy yield ratio of 80.

#### Aren’t photovoltaic panels going to get more and more efficientas technology improves?

I am sure that photovoltaic panels will become ever *cheaper*; I’m
alsosure that solar panels will become ever less energy-intensive to
*manufac-ture*, so their energy yield ratio will improve. But this
chapter’s photo-voltaic estimates weren’t constrained by the economic
cost of the panels,nor by the energy cost of their manufacture. This
chapter was concernedwith the maximum conceivable power delivered.
Photovoltaic panels with20% efficiency are already close to the
theoretical limit (see this chapter’sendnotes). I’ll be surprised if
this chapter’s estimate for roof-based photo-voltaics ever needs a
significant upward revision.

Solar biomass
-------------

> All of a sudden, you know, we may be in the energy business by being
> able to grow grass on the ranch! And have it harvested and converted
> into energy. That’s what’s close to happening. George W. Bush,
> February 2006

All available bioenergy solutions involve first growing green stuff,
andthen doing something with the green stuff. How big could the
energycollected by the green stuff possibly be? There are four main
routes to getenergy from solar-powered biological systems:

1.  We can grow specially-chosen plants and burn them in a power
    sta-tion that produces electricity or heat or both. We’ll call this
    “coalsubstitution.”
2.  We can grow specially-chosen plants (oil-seed rape, sugar cane,
    orcorn, say), turn them into ethanol or biodiesel, and shove that
    intocars, trains, planes or other places where such chemicals are
    useful.Or we might cultivate genetically-engineered bacteria,
    cyanobacteria,or algae that directly produce hydrogen, ethanol, or
    butanol, or evenelectricity. We’ll call all such approaches
    “petroleum substitution.”
3.  We can take by-products from other agricultural activities and
    burnthem in a power station. The by-products might range from straw
    (aby-product ofWeetabix) to chicken poo (a by-product
    ofMcNuggets).Burning by-products is coal substitution again, but
    using ordinaryplants, not the best high-energy plants. A power
    station that burnsagricultural by-products won’t deliver as much
    power per unit areaof farmland as an optimized biomass-growing
    facility, but it has the

![](figure41.png)

Figure 6.9. Solar photovoltaics: a 10 m^2^ array of building-mounted
south-facing panels with 20% efficiency can deliver about 5 kWh per day
of electrical energy. If 5% of the country were coated with
10%-efficient solar panels (200 m^2^ of panels per person) they would
deliver 50 kWh/day/person.

1.  advantage that it doesn’t monopolize the land. Burning methane
    gasfrom landfill sites is a similar way of getting energy, but it’s
    sustain-able only as long as we have a sustainable source of junk to
    keepputting into the landfill sites. (Most of the landfill methane
    comesfrom wasted food; people in Britain throw away about 300 g of
    foodper day per person.) Incinerating household waste is another
    slightlyless roundabout way of getting power from solar biomass.
2.  4.We can grow plants and feed them directly to energy-requiring
    hu-mans or other animals.

For all of these processes, the first staging post for the energy is in
a chem-ical molecule such as a carbohydrate in a green plant. We can
thereforeestimate the power obtainable from any and all of these
processes by es-timating how much power could pass through that first
staging post. Allsubsequent steps involving tractors, animals, chemical
facilities, land-fill sites, or power stations can only lose energy. So
the power at the firststaging post is an upper bound on the power
available from all plant-basedpower solutions.

So, let’s simply estimate the power at the first staging post. (In
Chapter[D](http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/withouthotair/cD/page_283.shtml)we’ll
go into more detail, estimating the maximum contribution of
eachprocess.) The average harvestable power of sunlight in Britain is
100 W/m^2^.The most efficient plants in Europe are about 2%-efficient at
turning solarenergy into carbohydrates, which would suggest that plants
might deliver2 W/m^2^; however, their efficiency drops at higher light
levels, and the bestperformance of any energy crops in Europe is closer
to 0.5 W/m^2^. Let’scover 75% of the country with quality green stuff.
That’s 3000 m^2^ perperson devoted to bio-energy. This is the same as
the British land area

![](figure42.png)

![](figure43.png)

Figure 6.10. Some *Miscanthus* grass enjoying the company of Dr Emily
Heaton, who is 5′4″ (163 cm) tall. In Britain, *Miscanthus* achieves a
power per unit area of 0.75 W/m^2^. Photo provided by the University of
Illinois.

Figure 6.11.[^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#43) Power
production, per unit area, achieved by various
plants.[^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#43) For
sources, see the end-notes. These power densities vary depending on
irrigation and fertilization; ranges are indicated for some crops, for
example wood has a range from 0.095–0.254 W/m^2^. The bottom three power
densities are for crops grown in tropical locations. The last power
density (tropical plantations\*) assumes genetic modification,
fertilizer application, and irrigation. In the text, I use 0.5 W/m^2^ as
a summary figure for the best energy crops in NW Europe.

currently devoted to agriculture. So the maximum power available,
ig-noring all the additional costs of growing, harvesting, and
processing thegreenery, is

0.5 W/m^2^ × 3000 m^2^ per person = 36 kWh/d per person.

Wow. That’s not very much, considering the outrageously generous
as-sumptions we just made, to try to get a big number. If you wanted
toget biofuels for cars or planes from the greenery, all the other steps
in thechain from farm to spark plug would inevitably be inefficient. I
think it’dbe optimistic to hope that the overall losses along the
processing chainwould be as small as 33%. Even burning dried wood in a
good woodboiler loses 20% of the heat up the chimney. So surely the true
potentialpower from biomass and biofuels cannot be any bigger than 24
kWh/d perperson. And don’t forget, we want to use some of the greenery
to makefood for us and for our animal companions.

Could genetic engineering produce plants that convert solar energyto
chemicals more efficiently? It’s conceivable; but I haven’t found
anyscientific publication predicting that plants in Europe could achieve
netpower production beyond 1 W/m^2^.

I’ll pop 24 kWh/d per person onto the green stack, emphasizing that
Ithink this number is an over-estimate – I think the true maximum
powerthat we could get from biomass will be smaller because of the
losses infarming and processing.

I think one conclusion is clear: *biofuels can’t add up* – at least, not
incountries like Britain, and not as a replacement for all transport
fuels. Evenleaving aside biofuels’ main defects – that their production
competes withfood, and that the additional inputs required for farming
and processingoften cancel out most of the delivered energy (figure
6.14) – biofuels madefrom plants, in a European country like Britain,
can deliver so little power,I think they are scarcely worth talking
about.

Notes and further reading
-------------------------

page no.

38*... compensate for the tilt between the sun and the land.* The
latitude ofCambridge is θ = 52°; the intensity of midday sunlight is
multiplied bycos θ ≈ 0.6. The precise factor depends on the time of
year, and varies be-tween cos(θ + 23°) = 0.26 and cos(θ - 23°) = 0.87.

–*In a typical UK location the sun shines during one third of daylight
hours.*The Highlands get 1100 h sunshine per year – a sunniness of 25%.
The bestspots in Scotland get 1400 h per year – 32%. Cambridge: 1500 ±
130 h peryear – 34%. South coast of England (the sunniest part of the
UK): 1700 h peryear – 39%. [2rqloc] Cambridge data from [2szckw]. See
also figure 6.16.

![](figure44.png)

Figure 6.12. Solar biomass, including all forms of biofuel, waste
incineration, and food: 24 kWh/d per person.

![](figure49.png)

Figure 6.13. Sunniness of Cambridge: the number of hours of sunshine per
year, expressed as a fraction of the total number of daylight hours.

![](figure45.png)

38*The average raw power of sunshine per square metre of south-facing
roof inBritain is roughly 110 W/m^2^, and of flat ground, roughly 100
W/m^2^*. Source:NASA “Surface meteorology and Solar Energy” [5hrxls].
Surprised thatthere’s so little difference between a tilted roof facing
south and a horizontalroof? I was. The difference really is just 10%
[6z9epq].

39*... that would be about 10 m^2^ of panels per person.* I estimated
the area ofsouth-facing roof per person by taking the area of land
covered by buildingsper person (48 m^2^ in England – table I.6),
multiplying by ¼ to get the south-facing fraction, and bumping the area
up by 40% to allow for roof tilt. Thisgives 16 m^2^ per person. Panels
usually come in inconvenient rectangles sosome fraction of roof will be
left showing; hence 10 m^2^ of panels.

–*The average power delivered by photovoltaic panels...*There’s a myth
going around that states that solar panels produce almost asmuch power
in cloudy conditions as in sunshine. This is simply not true. Ona bright
but cloudy day, solar photovoltaic panels and plants do continue
toconvert some energy, but much less: photovoltaic production falls
roughlyten-fold when the sun goes behind clouds (because the intensity
of the in-coming sunlight falls ten-fold). As figure 6.15 shows, the
power deliveredby photovoltaic panels is almost exactly proportional to
the intensity of thesunlight – at least, if the panels are at 25°C. To
complicate things, the powerdelivered depends on temperature too –
hotter panels have reduced power(typically 0.38% loss in power per °C) –
but if you check data from real pan-els, e.g. at www.solarwarrior.com,
you can confirm the main point: outputon a cloudy day is *far less* than
on a sunny day. This issue is obfuscated bysome solar-panel promoters
who discuss how the “efficiency” varies withsunlight. “The panels are
more efficient in cloudy conditions,” they say; this

Figure 6.14. This figure illustrates the quantitative questions that
must be asked of any proposed biofuel. What are the additional energy
inputs required for farming and processing? What is the delivered
energy? What is the *net* energy output? Often the additional inputs and
losses wipe out most of the energy delivered by the plants.

![](figure50.png)

Figure 6.15. Power produced by the Sanyo HIP-210NKHE1 module as a
function of light intensity (at 25°C, assuming an output voltage of 40
V). Source: datasheet, www.sanyo-solar.eu.

![](figure48.png)

may be true, but efficiency should not be confused with delivered power.

39*Typical solar panels have an efficiency of about 10%; expensive ones
per-form at 20%*. See figure 6.18. Sources: Turkenburg (2000), Sunpower
www.sunpowercorp.com, Sanyo www.sanyo-solar.eu, Suntech.

–*A device with efficiency greater than 30% would be quite remarkable*.
Thisis a quote from Hopfield and Gollub (1978), who were writing about
panelswithout concentrating mirrors or lenses. The theoretical limit for
a standard“single-junction” solar panel without concentrators, the
Shockley–Queisserlimit, says that at most 31% of the energy in sunlight
can be converted toelectricity (Shockley and Queisser, 1961). (The main
reason for this limitis that a standard solar material has a property
called its band-gap, whichdefines a particular energy of photon that
that material converts most ef-ficiently. Sunlight contains photons with
many energies; photons with en-ergy *below* the band-gap are not used at
all; photons with energy *greater*than the band-gap may be captured, but
all their energy in excess of theband-gap is lost.) Concentrators
(lenses or mirrors) can both reduce thecost (per watt) of photovoltaic
systems, and increase their efficiency. TheShockley–Queisser limit for
solar panels with concentrators is 41% efficiency.The only way to beat
the Shockley–Queisser limit is to make fancy photo-voltaic devices that
split the light into different wavelengths, processing
eachwavelength-range with its own personalized band-gap. These are
calledmultiple-junction photovoltaics. Recently multiple-junction
photovoltaicswith optical concentrators have been reported to be about
40% efficient.[2tl7t6], www.spectrolab.com. In July 2007, the University
of Delawarereported 42.8% efficiency with 20-times concentration
[6hobq2], [2lsx6t]. InAugust 2008, NREL reported 40.8% efficiency with
326-times concentration[62ccou]. Strangely, both these results were
called world efficiency records.What multiple-junction devices are
available on the market? Uni-solar sell athin-film triple-junction 58
W(peak) panel with an area of 1 m^2^. That impliesan efficiency, in full
sunlight, of only 5.8%.

40*Figure 6.5: Solar PV data*. Data and photograph kindly provided by
JonathanKimmitt.

–*Heliodynamics* – www.hdsolar.com. See figure 6.19.A similar system is
made by Arontis www.arontis.se.

Figure 6.17. Part of Shockley and Queisser’s explanation for the 31%
limit of the efficiency of simple photovoltaics.Left: the spectrum of
midday sunlight. The vertical axis shows the power density in W/m^2^ per
eV of spectral interval. The visible part of the spectrum is indicated
by the coloured section.Right: the energy captured by a photovoltaic
device with a single band-gap at 1.1 eV is shown by the tomato-shaded
area. Photons with energy less than the band-gap are lost. Some of the
energy of photons above the band-gap is lost; for example half of the
energy of every 2.2 eV photon is lost.Further losses are incurred
because of inevitable radiation from recombining charges in the
photovoltaic material.

![](figure51.png)

Figure 6.18. Efficiencies of solar photovoltaic modules available for
sale today. In the text I assume that roof-top photovoltaics are 20%
efficient, and that country-covering photovoltaics would be 10%
efficient. In a location where the average power density of incoming
sunlight is 100 W/m^2^, 20%-efficient panels deliver 20 W/m^2^.

41*The Solarpark in Muhlhausen, Bavaria.* On average this 25-hectare
farm isexpected to deliver 0.7 MW (17 000 kWh per day).New York’s
Stillwell Avenue subway station has integrated amorphous sili-con
thin-film photovoltaics in its roof canopy, delivering 4 W/m^2^ (Fies et
al.,2007).The Nellis solar power plant in Nevada was completed in
December, 2007,on 140 acres, and is expected to generate 30 GWh per
year. That’s 6 W/m^2^[5hzs5y].Serpa Solar Power Plant, Portugal (PV),
“the world’s most powerful so-lar power plant,” [39z5m5] [2uk8q8] has
sun-tracking panels occupying 60hectares, i.e., 600 000 m^2^ or 0.6
km^2^, expected to generate 20 GWh per year,i.e., 2.3 MW on average.
That’s a power per unit area of 3.8 W/m^2^.

41*The solar power capacity required to deliver 50 kWh/d per person in
the UKis more than 100 times all the photovoltaics in the whole world.*
To deliver50 kWh/d per person in the UK would require 125 GW average
power, whichrequires 1250 GW of capacity. At the end of 2007, world
installed photo-voltaics amounted to 10 GW peak; the build rate is
roughly 2 GW per year.

–*... paving 5% of this country with solar panels seems beyond the
bounds ofplausibility*. My main reason for feeling such a panelling of
the countrywould be implausible is that Brits like using their
countryside for farmingand recreation rather than solar-panel husbandry.
Another concern might beprice. This isn’t a book about economics, but
here are a few figures. Goingby the price-tag of the Bavarian solar
farm, to deliver 50 kWh/d per personwould cost €91 000 per person; if
that power station lasted 20 years withoutfurther expenditure, the
wholesale cost of the electricity would be €0.25 perkWh. Further
reading: David Carlson, BP solar [2ahecp].

43*People in Britain throw away about 300 g of food per day.* Source:
Ventour(2008).

–*Figure 6.10*. In the USA, *Miscanthus* grown without nitrogen
fertilizer yieldsabout 24 t/ha/y of dry matter. In Britain, yields of
12–16 t/ha/y are re-ported. Dry *Miscanthus* has a net calorific value
of 17 MJ/kg, so the Britishyield corresponds to a power density of 0.75
W/m^2^. Sources: Heaton et al.(2004) and [6kqq77]. The estimated yield
is obtained only after three yearsof undisturbed growing.

–*The most efficient plants are about 2% efficient; but the delivered
power perunit area is about 0.5 W/m^2^*. *At low light intensities*, the
best British plants are2.4% efficient in well-fertilized fields
(Monteith, 1977) but at higher light in-tensities, their conversion
efficiency drops. According to Turkenburg (2000)and Schiermeier et al.
(2008), the conversion efficiency of solar to biomassenergy is less than
1%.Here are a few sources to back up my estimate of *0.5 W/m^2^* for
vegetablepower in the UK. The Royal Commission on Environmental
Pollution’s esti-mate of the potential delivered power density from
energy crops in Britain is0.2 W/m^2^ (Royal Commission on Environmental
Pollution, 2004). On page43 of the Royal Society’s biofuels document
(Royal Society working groupon biofuels, 2008), *Miscanthus* tops the
list, delivering about 0.8 W/m^2^ ofchemical power.

![](figure52.png)

Figure 6.19. A combined-heat-and-power photovoltaic unit from
Heliodynamics. A reflector area of 32 m^2^ (a bit larger than the side
of a double-decker bus) delivers up to 10 kW of heat and 1.5 kW of
electrical power. In a sun-belt country, one of these one-ton devices
could deliver about 60 kWh/d of heat and 9 kWh/d of electricity. These
powers correspond to average fluxes of 80 W/m^2^ of heat and 12 W/m^2^
of electricity (that’s per square metre of device surface); these fluxes
are similar to the fluxes delivered by standard solar heating panels and
solar photovoltaic panels, but Heliodynamics’s concentrating design
delivers power at a lower cost, because most of the material is simple
flat glass. For comparison, the total power consumption of the average
European person is 125 kWh/d.

In the World Energy Assessment published by the UNDP, Rogner
(2000)writes: “Assuming a 45% conversion efficiency to electricity and
yields of15 oven dry tons per hectare per year, 2 km^2^ of plantation
would be neededper megawatt of electricity of installed capacity running
4,000 hours a year.”That is a power per unit area of 0.23 W(e)/m^2^. (1
W(e) means 1 watt ofelectrical power.)Energy for Sustainable Development
Ltd (2003) estimates that short-rotationcoppices can deliver over 10
tons of dry wood per hectare per year, whichcorresponds to a power
density of 0.57 W/m^2^. (Dry wood has a calorificvalue of 5 kWh per
kg.)According to Archer and Barber (2004), the instantaneous efficiency
of ahealthy leaf in optimal conditions can approach 5%, but the
long-term energy-storage efficiency of modern crops is 0.5–1%. Archer
and Barber suggest thatby genetic modification, it might be possible to
improve the storage efficiencyof plants, especially *C4 plants*, which
have already naturally evolved a moreefficient photosynthetic pathway.
C4 plants are mainly found in the trop-ics and thrive in high
temperatures; they don’t grow at temperatures below10°C. Some examples
of C4 plants are sugarcane, maize, sorghum, fingermillet, and
switchgrass. Zhu et al. (2008) calculate that the theoretical limitfor
the conversion efficiency of solar energy to biomass is 4.6% for C3
photo-synthesis at 30°C and today’s 380 ppm atmospheric CO~2~
concentration, and6% for C4 photosynthesis. They say that the highest
solar energy conversionefficiencies reported for C3 and C4 crops are
2.4% and 3.7% respectively;and, citing Boyer (1982), that the average
conversion efficiencies of majorcrops in the US are 3 or 4 times lower
than those record efficiencies (thatis, about 1% efficient). One reason
that plants don’t achieve the theoreticallimit is that they have
insufficient capacity to use all the incoming radiationof bright
sunlight. Both these papers (Zhu et al., 2008; Boyer, 1982)
discussprospects for genetic engineering of more-efficient plants.

43*Figure 6.11*. The numbers in this figure are drawn from Rogner (2000)
(netenergy yields of wood, rape, sugarcane, and tropical plantations);
BayerCrop Science (2003) (rape to biodiesel); Francis et al. (2005) and
Asselbergset al. (2006) (jatropha); Mabee et al. (2006) (sugarcane,
Brazil); Schmer et al.(2008) (switchgrass, marginal cropland in USA);
Shapouri et al. (1995) (cornto ethanol); Royal Commission on
Environmental Pollution (2004); Royal So-ciety working group on biofuels
(2008); Energy for Sustainable DevelopmentLtd (2003); Archer and Barber
(2004); Boyer (1982); Monteith (1977).

44*Even just setting fire to dried wood in a good wood boiler loses 20%
of theheat up the chimney*. Sources: Royal Society working group on
biofuels(2008); Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution (2004).

7   Heating and cooling {.red}
=======================

This chapter explores how much power we spend controlling the
temper-ature of our surroundings – at home and at work – and on warming
orcooling our food, drink, laundry, and dirty dishes.

Domestic water heating
----------------------

The biggest use of hot water in a house might be baths, showers,
dish-washing, or clothes-washing – it depends on your lifestyle. Let’s
estimatefirst the energy used by taking a hot bath.

The volume of bath-water is 50 cm × 15 cm × 150 cm ≈ 110 litre. Saythe
temperature of the bath is 50 °C (120 F) and the water coming into
thehouse is at 10 °C. The heat capacity of water, which measures how
muchenergy is required to heat it up, is 4200 J per litre per °C. So the
energyrequired to heat up the water by 40 °C is

4200 J/litre/°C × 110 litre × 40 °C ≈ 18 MJ ≈ 5 kWh.

So taking a bath uses about 5 kWh. For comparison, taking a shower(30
litres) uses about 1.4 kWh.

### Kettles and cookers

Britain, being a civilized country, has a 230 volt domestic electricity
supply.With this supply, we can use an electric kettle to boil several
litres of waterin a couple of minutes. Such kettles have a power of 3
kW. Why 3 kW?Because this is the biggest power that a 230 volt outlet
can deliver with-out the current exceeding the maximum permitted, 13
amps. In countrieswhere the voltage is 110 volts, it takes twice as long
to make a pot of tea.

If a household has the kettle on for 20 minutes per day, that’s an
averagepower consumption of 1 kWh per day. (I’ll work out the next few
items“per household,” with 2 people per household.)

One small ring on an electric cooker has the same power as a toaster:1
kW. The higher-power hot plates deliver 2.3 kW. If you use two ringsof
the cooker on full power for half an hour per day, that corresponds
to1.6 kWh per day.

A microwave oven usually has its cooking power marked on the front:mine
says 900 W, but it actually *consumes* about 1.4 kW. If you use
themicrowave for 20 minutes per day, that’s 0.5 kWh per day.

A regular oven guzzles more: about 3 kW when on full. If you use theoven
for one hour per day, and the oven’s on full power for half of thattime,
that’s 1.5 kWh per day.

![](figure53.png)

Figure 7.1. A flock of new houses.

![](figure54.png)

Figure 7.2. The water in a bath.

230 V × 13 A = 3000 W

![](figure55.png)

Figure 7.3. Power consumption by a heating and cooling device.

Device

power

timeper day

energyper day

Cooking

– kettle

3 kW

1⁄3 h

1 kWh/d

– microwave

1.4 kW

1⁄3 h

0.5 kWh/d

– electric cooker (rings)

3.3 kW

½ h

1.6 kWh/d

– electric oven

3 kW

½ h

1.5 kWh/d

Cleaning

– washing machine

2.5 kW

1 kWh/d

– tumble dryer

2.5 kW

0.8 h

2 kWh/d

– airing-cupboard drying

0.5 kWh/d

– washing-line drying

0 kWh/d

– dishwasher

2.5 kW

1.5 kWh/d

Cooling

– refrigerator

0.02 kW

24 h

0.5 kWh/d

– freezer

0.09 kW

24 h

2.3 kWh/d

– air-conditioning

0.6 kW

1 h

0.6 kWh/d

### Hot clothes and hot dishes

A clothes washer, dishwasher, and tumble dryer all use a power of
about2.5 kW when running.

A clothes washer uses about 80 litres of water per load, with an
energycost of about 1 kWh if the temperature is set to 40 °C. If we use
an indoorairing-cupboard instead of a tumble dryer to dry clothes, heat
is still requiredto evaporate the water – roughly 1.5 kWh to dry one
load of clothes,instead of 3 kWh.

Totting up the estimates relating to hot water, I think it’s easy to
useabout 12 kWh per day per person.

Hot air – at home and at work
-----------------------------

Now, does more power go into making hot water and hot food, or
intomaking hot air via our buildings’ radiators?

One way to estimate the energy used per day for hot air is to imaginea
building heated instead by electric fires, whose powers are more
familiarto us. The power of a small electric bar fire or electric fan
heater is 1 kW(24 kWh per day). In winter, you might need one of these
per person tokeep toasty. In summer, none. So we estimate that on
average one modernperson *needs* to use 12 kWh per day on hot air. But
most people use morethan they need, keeping several rooms warm
simultaneously (kitchen, livingroom, corridor, and bathroom, say). So a
plausible consumption figurefor hot air is about double that: 24 kWh per
day per person.

This chapter’s companion Chapter E contains a more detailed accountof
where the heat is going in a building; this model makes it possible to

Table 7.4. Energy consumption figures for heating and cooling devices,
per household.

![](figure56.png)

Figure 7.5. The hot water total at both home and work – including
bathing, showering, clothes washing, cookers, kettles, microwave oven,
and dishwashing – is about 12 kWh per day per person. I’ve given this
box a light colour to indicate that this power could be delivered by
low-grade thermal energy.

![](figure57.png)

Figure 7.6. A big electric heater: 2 kW.

predict the heat savings from turning the thermostat down,
double-glazingthe windows, and so forth.

### Warming the outdoors, and other luxuries

There’s a growing trend of warming the outdoors with patio heaters. Typ-
ical patio heaters have a power of 15 kW. So if you use one of these for
acouple of hours every evening, you are using an extra 30 kWh per day.

A more modest luxury is an electric blanket. An electric blanket for
adouble bed uses 140 W; switching it on for one hour uses 0.14 kWh.

Cooling
-------

### Fridge and freezer

We control the temperatures not only of the hot water and hot air
withwhich we surround ourselves, but also of the cold cupboards we
squeezeinto our hothouses. My fridge-freezer, pictured in figure 7.3,
consumes18 W on average – that’s roughly 0.5 kWh/d.

### Air-conditioning

In countries where the temperature gets above 30 °C, air-conditioning
isviewed as a necessity, and the energy cost of delivering that
temperaturecontrol can be large. However, this part of the book is about
British energyconsumption, and Britain’s temperatures provide little
need for air- conditioning (figure 7.8).

![](figure59.png)

An economical way to get air-conditioning is an air-source heat pump.A
window-mounted electric air-conditioning unit for a single room uses0.6
kW of electricity and (by heat-exchanger) delivers 2.6 kW of cooling.
Toestimate how much energy someone might use in the UK, I assumed
theymight switch such an air-conditioning unit on for about 12 hours per
dayon 30 days of the year. On the days when it’s on, the air-conditioner
uses7.2 kWh. The average consumption over the whole year is 0.6 kWh/d.

This chapter’s estimate of the energy cost of cooling – 1 kWh/d
perperson – includes this air-conditioning and a domestic refrigerator.
Society

![](figure58.png)

Figure 7.7. Hot air total – including domestic and workplace heating –
about 24 kWh per day per person.

Figure 7.8. Cambridge temperature in degrees Celsius, daily (red line),
and half-hourly (blue line) during 2006.

![](figure60.png)

Figure 7.9. Cooling total – including a refrigerator (fridge/freezer)
and a little summer air-conditioning – 1 kWh/d.

8   Hydroelectricity {.green}
====================

To make hydroelectric power, you need altitude, and you need
rainfall.Let’s estimate the total energy of all the rain as it runs down
to sea-level.

For this hydroelectric forecast, I’ll divide Britain into two: the
lower,dryer bits, which I’ll call “the lowlands;” and the higher, wetter
bits, whichI’ll call “the highlands.” I’ll choose Bedford and Kinlochewe
as my repre-sentatives of these two regions.

Let’s do the lowlands first. To estimate the gravitational power of
low-land rain, we multiply the rainfall in Bedford (584 mm per year) by
thedensity of water (1000 kg/m^3^), the strength of gravity (10 m/s^2^)
and thetypical lowland altitude above the sea (say 100 m). The power per
unitarea works out to 0.02 W/m^2^. That’s the power per unit area of
land onwhich rain falls.

When we multiply this by the area per person (2700 m^2^, if the
lowlandsare equally shared between all 60 million Brits), we find an
average rawpower of about 1 kWh per day per person. This is the absolute
upperlimit for lowland hydroelectric power, if every river were dammed
andevery drop perfectly exploited. Realistically, we will only ever dam
riverswith substantial height drops, with catchment areas much smaller
than thewhole country. Much of the water evaporates before it gets
anywhere neara turbine, and no hydroelectric system exploits the full
potential energy ofthe water. We thus arrive at a firm conclusion about
lowland water power.People may enjoy making “run-of-the-river” hydro and
other small-scalehydroelectric schemes, but such lowland facilities can
never deliver morethan 1 kWh per day per person.

![](figure407.png)

![](figure64.png)

Figure 8.1. Nant-y-Moch dam, part of a 55 MW hydroelectric scheme in
Wales. Photo by Dave Newbould, www.origins-photography.co.uk.

![](figure406.png)

[^**Erratum**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#55)

Figure 8.2. Altitudes of land in Britain. The rectangles show how much
land area there is at each height.

Ch 8 Page 56 Sustainable Energy - without the hot air

Let’s turn to the highlands. Kinlochewe is a rainier spot: it gets 2278
mmper year, four times more than Bedford. The height drops there are
biggertoo – large areas of land are above 300 m. So overall a
twelve-fold increasein power per square metre is plausible for
mountainous regions. The rawpower per unit area is roughly 0.24 W/m^2^.
If the highlands generouslyshare their hydro-power with the rest of the
UK (at 1300 m^2^ area per per-son), we find an upper limit of about 7
kWh per day per person. As inthe lowlands, this is the upper limit on
raw power if evaporation wereoutlawed and every drop were perfectly
exploited.

What should we estimate is the plausible practical limit? Let’s guess20%
of this – 1.4 kWh per day, and round it up a little to allow for
produc-tion in the lowlands: 1.5 kWh per day.

The actual power from hydroelectricity in the UK today is 0.2 kWh/dper
person, so this 1.5 kWh/d per person would require a seven-fold
in-crease in hydroelectric power.

Notes and further reading
-------------------------

55*Rainfall* statistics are from the BBC weather centre.

56*The raw power per unit area [of Highland rain] is roughly 0.24
W/m^2^*. Wecan check this estimate against the actual power density of
the Loch Sloyhydro-electric scheme, completed in 1950 (Ross, 2008). The
catchment areaof Loch Sloy is about 83 km^2^; the rainfall there is
about 2900 mm per year(a bit higher than the 2278 mm/y of Kinlochewe);
and the electricity outputin 2006 was 142 GWh per year, which
corresponds to a power density of0.2W per m^2^ of catchment area. Loch
Sloy’s surface area is about 1.5 km^2^,so the hydroelectric facility
itself has a[^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#56) per
unit lake area of 11 W/m^2^. Sothe hillsides, aqueducts, and tunnels
bringing water to Loch Sloy act like a55-fold power concentrator.

–*The actual power from hydroelectricity in the UK today is 0.2 kWh per
dayper person*. Source: MacLeay et al. (2007). In 2006, large-scale
hydro pro-duced 3515 GWh (from plant with a capacity of 1.37 GW);
small-scale hydro,212 GWh (0.01 kWh/d/p) (from a capacity of 153 MW).In
1943, when the growth of hydroelectricity was in full swing, the Northof
Scotland Hydroelectricity Board’s engineers estimated that the
Highlandsof Scotland could produce 6.3 TWh per year in 102 facilities –
that wouldcorrespond to 0.3 kWh/d per person in the UK (Ross,
2008).Glendoe, the first new large-scale hydroelectric project in the UK
since 1957,will add capacity of 100 MW and is expected to deliver 180
GWh per year.Glendoe’s catchment area is 75 km^2^, so its power density
works out to 0.27 Wper m^2^ of catchment area. Glendoe has been billed
as “big enough to powerGlasgow.” But if we share its 180 GWh per year
across the population ofGlasgow (616 000 people), we get only 0.8 kWh/d
per person. That is just5% of the average electricity consumption of 17
kWh/d per person. The 20-fold exaggeration is achieved by focusing on
Glendoe’s peak output ratherthan its average, which is 5 times smaller;
and by discussing “homes” ratherthan the total electrical power of
Glasgow (see p329).

![](figure65.png)

Figure 8.3. Hydroelectricity.

![](figure66.png)

Figure 8.4. A 60 kW waterwheel.

9   Light {.red}
=========

Lighting home and work
----------------------

The brightest domestic lightbulbs use 250 W, and bedside lamps use 40
W.In an old-fashioned incandescent bulb, most of this power gets turned
intoheat, rather than light. A fluorescent tube can produce an equal
amountof light using one quarter of the power of an incandescent bulb.

How much power does a moderately affluent person use for lighting?My
rough estimate, based on table 9.2, is that a typical two-person
homewith a mix of low-energy and high-energy bulbs uses about 5.5 kWh
perday, or 2.7 kWh per day per person. I assume that each person also
hasa workplace where they share similar illumination with their
colleagues;guessing that the workplace uses 1.3 kWh/d per person, we get
a roundfigure of 4 kWh/d per person.

Street-lights and traffic lights
--------------------------------

Do we need to include public lighting too, to get an accurate estimate,
ordo home and work dominate the lighting budget? Street-lights in fact
useabout 0.1 kWh per day per person, and traffic lights only 0.005 kWh/d
perperson – both negligible, compared with our home and workplace
lighting.What about other forms of public lighting – illuminated signs
and bollards,for example? There are fewer of them than street-lights;
and street-lightsalready came in well under our radar, so we don’t need
to modify ouroverall estimate of 4 kWh/d per person.

Lights on the traffic
---------------------

In some countries, drivers must switch their lights on whenever their
caris moving. How does the extra power required by that policy
comparewith the power already being used to trundle the car around?
Let’s saythe car has four incandescent lights totalling 100 W. The
electricity forthose bulbs is supplied by a 25%-efficient engine
powering a 55%-efficientgenerator, so the power required is 730 W. For
comparison, a typical cargoing at an average speed of 50 km/h and
consuming one litre per 12 km

  Device                   power    Time per day   Energy per dayper home
  ------------------------ -------- -------------- ------------------------
  10 incandescent lights   1 kW     5 h            5 kWh
  10 low-energy lights     0.1 kW   5 h            0.5 kWh

![](figure67.png)

Figure 9.1. Lighting – 4 kWh per day per person.

Table 9.2. Electric consumption for domestic lighting. A plausible total
is 5.5 kWh per home per day; and a similar figure at work; perhaps 4 kWh
per day per person.

has an average power consumption of 42 000W. So having the lights
onwhile driving requires 2% extra power.

What about the future’s electric cars? The power consumption of atypical
electric car is about 5000 W. So popping on an extra 100 W wouldincrease
its consumption by 2%. Power consumption would be smallerif we switched
all car lights to light-emitting diodes, but if we pay anymore attention
to this topic, we will be coming down with a severe case
ofevery-little-helps-ism.

The economics of low-energy bulbs
---------------------------------

Generally I avoid discussing economics, but I’d like to make an
exceptionfor lightbulbs. Osram’s 20 W low-energy bulb claims the same
lightoutput as a 100 W incandescent bulb. Moreover, its lifetime is said
to be15 000 hours (or “12 years,” at 3 hours per day). In contrast a
typical in-candescent bulb might last 1000 hours. So during a 12-year
period, youhave this choice (figure 9.3): buy 15 incandescent bulbs and
1500 kWh ofelectricity (which costs roughly £150); or buy one low-energy
bulb and300 kWh of electricity (which costs roughly £30).

#### Should I wait until the old bulb dies before replacing it?

It feels like a waste, doesn’t it? Someone put resources into making
theold incandescent lightbulb; shouldn’t we cash in that original
investmentby using the bulb until it’s worn out? But the economic answer
is clear:*continuing to use an old lightbulb is throwing good money
after bad*. If youcan find a satisfactory low-energy replacement,
replace the old bulb now.

#### What about the mercury in compact fluorescent lights? Are LEDbulbs better than fluorescents?

Researchers say that LED (light-emitting diode) bulbs will soon be
evenmore energy-efficient than compact fluorescent lights. The
efficiency of alight is measured in *lumens per watt*. I checked the
numbers on my latestpurchases: the Philips Genie 11 W compact
fluorescent bulb (figure 9.4)has a brightness of 600 lumens, which is an
efficiency of **55 lumens perwatt**; regular incandescent bulbs deliver
**10 lumens per watt**; the Omicron1.3 W lamp, which has 20 white LEDs
hiding inside it, has a brightnessof 46 lumens, which is an efficiency
of **35 lumens per watt**. So this LEDbulb is almost as efficient as the
fluorescent bulb. The LED industry stillhas a little catching up to do.
In its favour, the LED bulb has a life of50 000 hours, eight times the
life of the fluorescent bulb. As I write, Isee that www.cree.com is
selling LEDs with a power of **100 lumens perwatt**. It’s projected that
in the future, white LEDs will have an efficiencyof over 150 lumens per
watt [ynjzej]. I expect that within another coupleof years, the best
advice, from the point of view of both energy efficiencyand avoiding
mercury pollution, will be to use LED bulbs.

![](figure68.png)

Figure 9.3. Total cumulative cost of using a traditional incandescent
100 W bulb for 3 hours per day, compared with replacing it *now* with an
Osram Dulux Longlife Energy Saver (pictured). Assumptions: electricity
costs 10p per kWh; replacement traditional bulbs cost 45p each;
energy-saving bulbs cost £9. (I know you can find them cheaper than
this, but this graph shows that even at £9, they’re much more
economical.)

![](figure69.png)

Figure 9.4. Philips 11 W alongside Omicron 1.3 W LED bulb.

### Mythconceptions

#### “There is no point in my switching to energy-saving lights. The“wasted” energy they put out heats my home, so it’s not wasted.”

This myth is addressed in Chapter 11, p71.

Notes and further reading
-------------------------

page no.

57*Street-lights use about 0.1 kWh per day per person...* There’s
roughly onesodium street-light per 10 people; each light has a power of
100 W, switchedon for 10 hours per day. That’s 0.1 kWh per day per
person.

–*... and traffic lights only 0.005 kWh/d per person*. Britain has 420
000 trafficand pedestrian signal light bulbs, consuming 100 million kWh
of electricityper year. Shared between 60 million people, 100 million
kWh per year is0.005 kWh/d per person.

–*There are fewer signs and illuminated bollards than
street-lights*.[www.highwayelectrical.org.uk]. There are 7.7 million
lighting units (streetlighting, illuminated signs and bollards) in the
UK. Of these, roughly 7 millionare street-lights and 1 million are
illuminated road signs. There are210 000 traffic signals.According to
DUKES 2005, the total power for public lighting is 2095 GWh/y,which is
0.1 kWh/d per person.

–*55%-efficient generator* – source:en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alternator.
Generators in power stations are muchmore efficient at converting
mechanical work to electricity.

  Bulb type             efficiency(lumens/W)
  --------------------- ----------------------
  incandescent          10
  halogen               16-24
  white LED             35
  compact fluorescent   55
  large fluorescent     94
  sodium street light   150

Table 9.5. Lighting efficiencies of commercially-available bulbs. In the
future, white LEDs are expected to deliver 150 lumens per watt.

10   Offshore wind {.green}
==================

> The London Array offshore wind farm will make a crucial contribution
> to the UK’s renewable energy targets.
>
> James Smith, chairman of Shell UK

> Electric power is too vital a commodity to be used as a job-creation
> programme for the wind turbine industry.
>
> David J. White

At sea, winds are stronger and steadier than on land, so offshore wind
farms deliver a higher power per unit area than onshore wind farms. The
Kentish Flats wind farm in the Thames Estuary, about 8.5 km offshore
from Whitstable and Herne Bay, which started operation at the end of
2005, was predicted to have an average power per unit area of 3.2
W/m^2^. In 2006, its average power per unit area was 2.6 W/m^2^.

I’ll assume that a power per unit area of 3 W/m^2^ (50% larger than our
onshore estimate of 2 W/m^2^) is an appropriate figure for offshore wind
farms around the UK.

We now need an estimate of the area of sea that could plausibly be cov-
ered with wind turbines. It is conventional to distinguish between
*shallow* offshore wind and *deep* offshore wind, as illustrated in
figure 10.2. Conven- tional wisdom seems to be that *shallow* offshore
wind (depth less than 25– 30 m), while roughly twice as costly as
land-based wind, is economically feasible, given modest subsidy; and
*deep* offshore wind is at present not economically feasible. As of
2008, there’s just one deep offshore windfarm in UK waters, an
experimental prototype sending all its electricity to a nearby oilrig
called Beatrice.

Shallow offshore
----------------

Within British territorial waters, the shallow area is about 40 000
km^2^, most of it off the coast of England and Wales. This area is about
two Waleses.

The average power available from shallow offshore wind farms occu- pying
the whole of this area would be 120 GW, or 48 kWh/d per person. But it’s
hard to imagine this arrangement being satisfactory for shipping.
Substantial chunks of this shallow water would, I’m sure, remain
off-limits for wind farms. The requirement for shipping corridors and
fishing areas must reduce the plausibly-available area; I propose that
we assume the available fraction is one third (but please see this
chapter’s end-notes for a more pessimistic view!). So we estimate the
maximum plausible power from shallow offshore wind to be 16 kWh/d per
person.

Before moving on, I want to emphasize the large area – two thirds of a
Wales – that would be required to deliver this 16 kWh/d per person. If

![](figure71.png)

Figure 10.1. Kentish Flats – a shallow offshore wind farm. Each rotor
has a diameter of 90 m centred on a hub height of 70 m. Each “3 MW”
turbine weighs 500 tons, half of which is its foundation. Photos © Elsam
(elsam.com). Used with permission.

![](figure70.png)

we take the total coastline of Britain (length: 3000 km), and put a
strip of turbines 4 km wide all the way round, that strip would have an
area of 13 000 km^2^. That is the area we must fill with turbines to
deliver 16 kWh/d per person. To put it another way, consider the number
of turbines re- quired. 16 kWh/d per person would be delivered by 44 000
“3 MW” tur- bines, which works out to 15 per kilometre of coastline, if
they were evenly spaced around 3000 km of coast.

Offshore wind is tough to pull off because of the corrosive effects of
sea water. At the big Danish wind farm, Horns Reef, all 80 turbines had
to be dismantled and repaired after only 18 months’ exposure to the sea
air. The Kentish Flats turbines seem to be having similar problems with
their gearboxes, one third needing replacement during the first 18
months.

Deep offshore
-------------

The area with depths between 25 m and 50 m is about 80 000 km^2^ – the
size of Scotland. Assuming again a power per unit area of 3 W/m^2^,
“deep” off- shore wind farms could deliver another 240 GW, or 96 kWh/d
per person, if turbines completely filled this area. Again, we must make
corridors for shipping. I suggest as before that we assume we can use
one third of the area for wind farms; this area would then be about 30%
bigger than Wales,

Figure 10.2. UK territorial waters with depth less than 25 m (yellow)
and depth between 25 m and 50 m (purple). Data from DTI Atlas of
Renewable Marine Resources. © Crown copyright.

![](figure408.png)

and much of it would be further than 50 km offshore. The outcome: if an
area equal to a 9 km-wide strip all round the coast were filled with
tur- bines, deep offshore wind could deliver a power of 32 kWh/d per
person. A huge amount of power, yes; but still no match for our huge
consumption. And we haven’t spoken about the issue of wind’s
intermittency. We’ll come back to that in Chapter 26.

I’ll include this potential deep offshore contribution in the production
stack, with the proviso, as I said before, that wind experts reckon deep
offshore wind is prohibitively expensive.

Some comparisons and costs
--------------------------

So, how’s our race between consumption and production coming along?
Adding both shallow and deep offshore wind to the production stack, the
green stack has a lead. Something I’d like you to notice about this
race, though, is this contrast: how *easy* it is to toss a bigger log on
the consumption fire, and how *difficult* it is to grow the production
stack. As I write this paragraph, I’m feeling a little cold, so I step
over to my thermostat and turn it up. It’s so simple for me to consume
an extra 30 kWh per day. But squeezing an extra 30 kWh per day per
person from renewables requires an industrialization of the environment
so large it is hard to imagine.

To create 48 kWh per day of offshore wind per person in the UK would
require 60 million tons of concrete and steel – one ton per person.
Annual world steel production is about 1200 million tons, which is 0.2
tons per person in the world. During the second world war, American
shipyards built 2751 Liberty ships, each containing 7000 tons of steel –
that’s a total of 19 million tons of steel, or 0.1 tons per American. So
the building of 60 million tons of wind turbines is not off the scale of
achievability; but don’t kid yourself into thinking that it’s easy.
Making this many windmills is as big a feat as building the Liberty
ships.

For comparison, to make 48 kWh per day of nuclear power per person in
the UK would require 8 million tons of steel and 0.14 million
tons[^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#62) of concrete.
We can also compare the 60 million tons of offshore wind hardware that
we’re trying to imagine with the existing fossil-fuel hardware already
sitting in and around the North Sea (figure 10.4). In 1997, 200
installations and 7000 km of pipelines in the UK waters of the North Sea
contained 8 million tons of steel and concrete. The newly built Langeled
gas pipeline from Norway to Britain, which will convey gas with a power
of 25 GW (10 kWh/d/p), used another 1 million tons of steel and 1
million tons of concrete (figure 10.5).

The UK government announced on 10th December 2007 that it would permit
the creation of 33 GW of offshore wind capacity (which would deliver on
average 10 GW to the UK, or 4.4 kWh per day per person), a plan branded
“pie in the sky” by some in the wind industry. Let’s run with a round
figure of 4 kWh per day per person. This is one quarter of my

![](figure72.png)

Figure 10.3. Offshore wind.

shallow 16 kWh per day per person. To obtain this average power requires
roughly 10 000 “3 MW” wind turbines like those in figure 10.1. (They
have a capacity of “3 MW” but on average they deliver 1 MW. I pop quotes
round “3 MW” to indicate that this is a capacity, a peak power.)

What would this “33 GW”’ of power cost to erect? Well, the “90 MW”
Kentish Flats farm cost £105 million, so “33 GW” would cost about £33
billion. One way to clarify this £33 billion cost of offshore wind
delivering 4 kWh/d per person is to share it among the UK population;
that comes out to £550 per person. This is a much better deal,
incidentally, than micro- turbines. A roof-mounted microturbine
currently costs about £1500 and, even at a very optimistic windspeed of
6 m/s, delivers only 1.6 kWh/d. In reality, in a typical urban location
in England, such microturbines deliver 0.2 kWh per day.

Another bottleneck constraining the planting of wind turbines is the
special ships required. To erect 10 000 wind turbines (“33 GW”) over a
period of 10 years would require roughly 50 jack-up barges. These cost
£60 million each, so an extra capital investment of £3 billion would be
required. Not a show-stopper compared with the £33bn price tag already
quoted, but the need for jack-up barges is certainly a detail that
requires some forward planning.

### Costs to birds

Do windmills kill “huge numbers” of birds? Wind farms recently got ad-
verse publicity from Norway, where the wind turbines on Smola, a set of
islands off the north-west coast, killed 9 white-tailed eagles in 10
months. I share the concern of BirdLife International for the welfare of
rare birds. But I think, as always, it’s important to do the numbers.
It’s been esti- mated that 30 000 birds per year are killed by wind
turbines in Denmark, where windmills generate
9%[^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#63) of the
electricity. Horror! Ban windmills! We also learn, moreover, that
*traffic* kills *one million* birds per year in Den- mark.
Thirty-times-greater horror! Thirty-times-greater incentive to ban cars!
And in Britain, 55 million birds per year are killed by *cats* (figure
10.6).

Going on emotions alone, I would like to live in a country with
virtually no cars, virtually no windmills, and with plenty of cats and
birds (with the cats that prey on birds perhaps being preyed upon by
Norwegian white- tailed eagles, to even things up). But what I really
hope is that decisions about cars and windmills are made by careful
rational thought, not by emotions alone. Maybe we do need the windmills!

![](figure74.png)

Figure 10.4. The Magnus platform in the northern UK sector of the North
Sea contains 71 000 tons of steel. In the year 2000 this platform
delivered 3.8 million tons of oil and gas – a power of 5 GW. The
platform cost £1.1 billion. Photos by Terry Cavner.

![](figure75.png)

Figure 10.5. Pipes for Langeled. From Bredero–Shaw [brederoshaw.com].

![](figure73.png)

Notes and further reading
-------------------------

page no.

60*The Kentish Flats wind farm in the Thames Estuary...* See
www.kentishflats.co.uk. Its 30 Vestas V90 wind turbines have a total
peak output of 90 MW, and the predicted average output was 32 MW (as-
suming a load factor of 36%). The mean wind speed at the hub height is
8.7 m/s. The turbines stand in 5 m-deep water, are spaced 700 m apart,
and occupy an area of 10 km^2^. The power density of this offshore wind
farm was thus predicted to be 3.2 W/m^2^. In fact, the average output
was 26 MW, so the average load factor in 2006 was 29% [wbd8o]. This
works out to a power den- sity of 2.6 W/m^2^. The North Hoyle wind farm
off Prestatyn, North Wales, had a higher load factor of 36% in 2006. Its
thirty 2 MW turbines occupy 8.4 km^2^. They thus had an average power
density of 2.6 W/m^2^.

–*...shallow offshore wind, while roughly twice as costly as onshore
wind, is economically feasible, given modest subsidy*. Source: Danish
wind associa- tion windpower.org.

–*...deep offshore wind is at present not economically feasible.*
Source: BritishWind Energy Association briefing document, September
2005, www.bwea.com. Nevertheless, a deep offshore demonstration project
in 2007 put two turbines adjacent to the Beatrice oil field, 22 km off
the east coast of Scotland (figure 10.8). Each turbine has a “capacity”
of 5 MW and sits in a water depth of 45 m. Hub height: 107 m; diameter
126 m. All the elec- tricity generated will be used by the oil
platforms. Isn’t that special! The 10 MW project cost £30 million – this
price-tag of £3 per watt (peak) can be

Figure 10.6. Birds lost in action. Annual bird deaths in Denmark caused
by wind turbines and cars, and annual bird deaths in Britain caused by
cats. Numbers from Lomborg (2001). Collisions with windows kill a
similar number to cats.

Region

depth 5 to 30 metres

depth 5 to 30 metres

area (km^2^)

potential resource (kWh/d/p)

area (km^2^)

potential resource (kWh/d/p)

North West

3300

6

2000

4

Greater Wash

7400

14

950

2

Thames Estuary

2100

4

850

2

Other

14000

28

45000

87

TOTAL

27000

52

49000

94

compared with that of Kentish Flats, £1.2 per watt (£105 million for 90
MW). www.beatricewind.co.uk

It’s possible that *floating* wind turbines may change the economics of
deep offshore wind.

60*The area available for offshore wind*. The Department of Trade and
Industry’s (2002) document “Future Offshore” gives a detailed breakdown
of areas that are useful for offshore wind power. Table 10.7 shows the
estimated resource in 76 000 km^2^ of shallow and deep water. The DTI’s
estimated power contribution, if these areas were *entirely* filled with
windmills, is 146 kWh/d per person (consisting of 52 kWh/d/p from the
shallow and 94 kWh/d/p from the deep). But the DTI’s estimate of the
potential offshore wind generation resource is just 4.6 kWh per day per
person. It might be interesting to describe how they get down from this
potential resource of 146 kWh/d per person to 4.6 kWh/d per person. Why
a final figure so much lower than ours? First, they imposed these
limits: the water must be within 30 km of the shore and less than 40 m
deep; the sea bed must not have gradient greater than 5°; shipping
lanes, military zones, pipelines, fishing grounds, and wildlife reserves
are excluded. Second, they assumed that only 5% of potential sites will
be developed (as a result of seabed composition or planning
constraints); they reduced the capacity by 50% for all sites less than
10 miles from shore, for reasons of public ac- ceptability; they further
reduced the capacity of sites with wind speed over 9 m/s by 95% to
account for “development barriers presented by the hostile environment;”
and other sites with average wind speed 8–9 m/s had their capacities
reduced by 5%.

61*...if we take the total coastline of Britain (length: 3000 km), and
put a strip of turbines 4 km wide all the way round...* Pedants will say
that “the coastline of Britain is not a well-defined length, because the
coast is a fractal.” Yes, yes, it’s a fractal. But, dear pedant, please
take a map and put a strip of turbines 4 km wide around mainland
Britain, and see if it’s not the case that your strip is indeed about
3000 km long.

–*Horns Reef* (Horns Rev). The difficulties with this “160 MW” Danish
wind farm off Jutland [www.hornsrev.dk] are described by Halkema (2006).

Table 10.7. Potential offshore wind generation resource in proposed
strategic regions, if these regions were *entirely filled* with wind
turbines. From Dept. of Trade and Industry (2002b).

When it is in working order, Horns Reef’s load factor is 0.43 and its
average power per unit area is 2.6 W/m^2^.

62*Liberty ships* – www.liberty-ship.com/html/yards/introduction.html

–*...fossil fuel installations in the North Sea contained 8 million tons
of steel and concrete* – Rice and Owen (1999).

–*The UK government announced on 10th December 2007 that it would permit
the creation of 33 GW of offshore capacity...* [25e59w].

–*...“pie in the sky”*. Source: Guardian [2t2vjq].

63*What would “33 GW” of offshore wind cost?* According to the DTI in
Novem- ber 2002, electricity from offshore wind farms costs about £50
per MWh (5p per kWh) (Dept. of Trade and Industry, 2002b, p21). Economic
facts vary, however, and in April 2007 the estimated cost of offshore
was up to £92 per MWh (Dept. of Trade and Industry, 2007, p7). By April
2008, the price of offshore wind evidently went even higher: Shell
pulled out of their commit- ment to build the London Array. It’s because
offshore wind is so expensive that the Government is having to increase
the number of ROCs (renewable obligation certificates) per unit of
offshore wind energy. The ROC is the unit of subsidy given out to
certain forms of renewable electricity generation. The standard value of
a ROC is £45, with 1 ROC per MWh; so with a wholesale price of roughly
£40/MWh, renewable generators are getting paid £85 per MWh. So 1 ROC per
MWh is not enough subsidy to cover the cost of £92 per MWh. In the same
document, estimates for other renewables (medium lev- elized costs in
2010) are as follows. Onshore wind: £65–89/MWh; co-firing of biomass:
£53/MWh; large-scale hydro: £63/MWh; sewage gas: £38/MWh; solar PV:
£571/MWh; wave: £196/MWh; tide: £177/MWh. “Dale Vince, chief executive
of green energy provider Ecotricity, which is engaged in building
onshore wind farms, said that he supported the Gov- ernment’s [offshore
wind] plans, but only if they are not to the detriment of onshore wind.
‘It’s dangerous to overlook the fantastic resource we have in this
country. . . By our estimates, it will cost somewhere in the region of
£40bn to build the 33 GW of offshore power Hutton is proposing. We could
do the same job onshore for £20bn’.” [57984r]

–*In a typical urban location in England, microturbines deliver 0.2 kWh
per day*. Source: *Third Interim Report*,
www.warwickwindtrials.org.uk/2.html. Among the best results in the
Warwick Wind Trials study is a Windsave WS1000 (a 1-kW machine) in
Daventry mounted at a height of 15 m above the ground, generating 0.6
kWh/d on average. But some microturbines de- liver only 0.05 kWh per day
– Source: Donnachadh McCarthy: “My carbon- free year,” *The
Independent*, December 2007 [6oc3ja]. The Windsave WS1000 wind turbine,
sold across England in B&Q’s shops, won an Eco-Bollocks award from
*Housebuilder’s Bible* author Mark Brinkley: “Come on, it’s time to
admit that the roof-mounted wind turbine industry is a complete fiasco.
Good money is being thrown at an invention that doesn’t work. This is
the Sinclair C5 of the Noughties.” [5soql2]. The Met Office and Carbon
Trust published a report in July 2008 [6g2jm5], which estimates that, if
small-scale

![](figure77.png)

Figure 10.8. Construction of the Beatrice demonstrator deep offshore
windfarm. Photos kindly provided by Talisman Energy (UK) Limited.

![](figure76.png)

Figure 10.9. Kentish Flats. Photos © Elsam (elsam.com). Used with
permission.

turbines were installed at all houses where economical in the UK, they
would generate in total roughly 0.7 kWh/d/p. They advise that
roof-mounted tur- bines in towns are usually worse than useless: “in
many urban situations, roof-mounted turbines may not pay back the carbon
emitted during their production, installation and operation.”

63*Jack-up barges cost £60 million each*. Source:
news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/magazine/7206780.stm. I estimated that we would need
roughly 50 of them by assuming that there would be 60 work- friendly
days each year, and that erecting a turbine would take 3 days.

Further reading: UK wind energy database [www.bwea.com/ukwed/].

11   Gadgets {.red}
============

One of the greatest dangers to society is the phone charger. The BBC
News has been warning us of this since 2005:

> “The nuclear power stations will all be switched off in a few years.
> How can we keep Britain’s lights on? ... **unplug your mobile-phone
> charger when it’s not in use**.”

Sadly, a year later, Britain hadn’t got the message, and the BBC was
forced to report:

> “**Britain tops energy waste league**.”

And how did this come about? The BBC rams the message home:

> “65% of UK consumers leave chargers on.”

From the way reporters talk about these planet-destroying black ob-
jects, it’s clear that they are roughly as evil as Darth Vader. But how
evil, exactly?

In this chapter we’ll find out the truth about chargers. We’ll also in-
vestigate their cousins in the gadget parade: computers, phones, and
TVs. Digital set-top boxes. Cable modems. In this chapter we’ll estimate
the power used in running them and charging them, but not in
manufacturing the toys in the first place – we’ll address that in the
later chapter on “stuff.”

The truth about chargers
------------------------

Modern phone chargers, when left plugged in with no phone attached, use
about half a watt. In our preferred units, this is a power consump- tion
of about 0.01 kWh per day. For anyone whose consumption stack is over
100 kWh per day, the BBC’s advice, *always unplug the phone charger*,
could potentially reduce their energy consumption by one hundredth of
one percent (if only they would do it).

> Every little helps!

I don’t think so. Obsessively switching off the phone-charger is like
bailing the Titanic with a teaspoon. Do switch it off, but please be
aware how tiny a gesture it is. Let me put it this way:

> All the energy saved in switching off your charger for one day is used
> up in *one second* of car-driving.

> The energy saved in switching off the charger for *one year* is equal
> to the energy in a single hot bath.

![](figure78.png)

Figure 11.1. Planet destroyers. Spot the difference.

![](figure79.png)

Figure 11.2. These five chargers – three for mobile phones, one for a
pocket PC, and one for a laptop – registered less than one watt on my
power meter.

Admittedly, some older chargers use more than half a watt – if it’s warm
to the touch, it’s probably using one watt or even three (figure 11.3).
A three-watt-guzzling charger uses 0.07 kWh per day. I think that it’s a
good idea to switch off such a charger – it *will* save you three pounds
per year. But don’t kid yourself that you’ve “done your bit” by so
doing. 3W is only a tiny fraction of total energy consumption.

OK, that’s enough bailing the Titanic with a teaspoon. Let’s find out
where the electricity is really being used.

Gadgets that really suck
------------------------

Table 11.4 shows the power consumptions, in watts, of a houseful of gad-
gets. The first column shows the power consumption when the device is
actually being used – for example, when a sound system is actually play-
ing sound. The second column shows the consumption when the device is
switched on, but sitting doing nothing. I was particularly shocked to
find that a laser-printer sitting idle consumes 17 W – the same as the
average consumption of a fridge-freezer! The third column shows the
consump- tion when the gadget is explicitly asked to go to sleep or
standby. The fourth shows the consumption when it is completely switched
off – but still left plugged in to the mains. I’m showing all these
powers in watts – to convert back to our standard units, remember that
40 W is 1 kWh/d. A nice rule of thumb, by the way, is that each watt
costs about one pound per year (assuming electricity costs 10p per kWh).

The biggest guzzlers are the computer, its screen, and the television,
whose consumption is in the hundreds of watts, when on. Entertainment
systems such as stereos and DVD players swarm in the computer’s wake,
many of them consuming 10 W or so. A DVD player may cost just £20 in the
shop, but if you leave it switched on all the time, it’s costing you
another £10 per year. Some stereos and computer peripherals consume
several watts even when switched off, thanks to their
mains-transformers. To be sure that a gadget is truly off, you need to
switch it off at the wall.

### Powering the hidden tendrils of the information age

According to Jonathan Koomey (2007), the computer-servers in US data-
centres and their associated plumbing (air conditioners, backup power
sys- tems, and so forth) consumed 0.4 kWh per day per person – just over
1% of US electricity consumption. That’s the consumption figure for
2005, which, by the way, is twice as big as the consumption in 2000,
because the number of servers grew from 5.6 million to 10 million.

![](figure80.png)

Figure 11.3. This wasteful cordless phone and its charger use 3 W when
left plugged in. That’s 0.07 kWh/d. If electricity costs 10p per kWh
then a 3 W trickle costs £3 per year.

Gadget

Power consumption (W)

on and active

on but inactive

standby

off

Computer and peripherals:

computer box

80

55

2

cathode-ray display

110

3

0

LCD display

34

2

1

projector

150

5

laser printer

500

17

wireless & cable-modem

9

Laptop computer

16

9

0.5

Portable CD player

2

Bedside clock-radio

1.1

1

Bedside clock-radio

1.9

1.4

Digital radio

9.1

3

Radio cassette-player

3

1.2

1.2

Stereo amplifier

6

6

Stereo amplifier II

13

0

Home cinema sound

7

7

4

DVD player

7

6

DVD player II

12

10

5

TV

100

10

Video recorder

13

1

Digital TV set top box

6

5

Clock on microwave oven

2

Xbox

160

2.4

Sony Playstation 3

190

2

Nintendo Wii

18

2

Answering machine

2

Answering machine II

3

Cordless telephone

1.7

Mobile phone charger

5

0.5

Vacuum cleaner

1600

Table 11.4. Power consumptions ofvarious gadgets, in watts. 40 W
is1 kWh/d.

![](figure409.png)

### Other gadgets

A vacuum cleaner, if you use it for a couple of hours per week, is
equiva- lent to about 0.2 kWh/d. Mowing the lawn uses about 0.6 kWh. We
could go on, but I suspect that computers and entertainment systems are
the big suckers on most people’s electrical balance-sheet.

This chapter’s summary figure: it’ll depend how many gadgets you have at
home and work, but a healthy houseful or officeful of gadgets left on
all the time could easily use 5 kWh/d.

### Mythconceptions

#### “There is no point in my switching off lights, TVs, and phone chargers during the winter. The ‘wasted’ energy they put out heats my home, so it’s not wasted.”

This myth is *True* for a few people, but only during the winter; but
*False* for most.

If your house is being heated by electricity through ordinary bar fires
or blower heaters then, yes, it’s much the same as heating the house
with any electricity-wasting appliances. But if you are in this
situation, you should change the way you heat your house. Electricity is
high-grade energy, and heat is low-grade energy. *It’s a waste to turn
electricity into heat*. To be precise, if you make only one unit of heat
from a unit of electricity, that’s a waste. Heaters called air-source
heat pumps or ground-source heat pumps can do much better, delivering 3
or 4 units of heat for every unit of electricity consumed. They work
like back-to-front refrigerators, pumping heat into your house from the
outside air (see Chapter 21).

For the rest, whose homes are heated by fossil fuels or biofuels, it’s a
good idea to avoid using electrical gadgets as a heat source for your
home – at least for as long as our increases in electricity-demand are
served from fossil fuels. It’s better to burn the fossil fuel at home.
The point is, if you use electricity from an ordinary fossil power
station, more than half of the energy from the fossil fuel goes sadly up
the cooling tower. Of the energy that gets turned into electricity,
about 8% is lost in the transmission system. If you burn the fossil fuel
in your home, more of the energy goes directly into making hot air for
you.

Notes and further reading
-------------------------

page no.

68*The BBC News has been warning us ... unplug your mobile-phone
charger*. The BBC News article from 2005 said: “the nuclear power
stations will all be switched off in a few years. How can we keep
Britain’s lights on? Here’s three ways you can save energy: switch off
video recorders when they’re not in use; don’t leave televisions on
standby; and unplug your mobile-phone charger when it’s not in use.”

![](figure81.png)

Figure 11.5. Information systems and other gadgets.

68*Modern phone chargers, when left plugged in with no phone attached,
use about half a watt*. The Maplin power meter in figure 11.2 is not
accu- rate enough to measure this sort of power. I am grateful to Sven
Weier and Richard McMahon of Cambridge University Engineering Department
who measured a standard Nokia charger in an accurate calorimeter; they
found that, when not connected to the mobile, it wastes 0.472 W. They
made additional interesting measurements: the charger, when connected to
a fully-charged mobile phone, wastes 0.845 W; and when the charger is
do- ing what it’s meant to do, charging a partly-charged Nokia mobile,
it wastes 4.146 W as heat. Pedants sometimes ask “what about the
*reactive power* of the charger?” This is a technical niggle, not really
worth our time. For the record, I measured the reactive power (with a
crummy meter) and found it to be about 2 VA per charger. Given that the
power loss in the national grid is 8% of the delivered power, I reckon
that the power loss associated with the reactive power is at most 0.16
W. When actually making a phone-call, the mobile uses 1 W.

Further reading: Kuehr (2003).

![](figure82.png)

Figure 11.6. Advertisement from the “DIY planet repairs” campaign. The
text reads “**Unplug**. If every London household unplugged their
mobile-phone chargers when not in use, we could save 31,000 tonnes of
CO~2~ and £7.75m per year.” london.gov.uk/diy/

![](figure410.png)

12   Wave {.green}
=========

If wave power offers hope to any country, then it must offer hope to the
United Kingdom and Ireland – flanked on the one side by the Atlantic
Ocean, and on the other by the North Sea.

First, let’s clarify where waves come from: *sun makes wind and wind
makes waves*.

Most of the sunlight that hits our planet warms the oceans. The warmed
water warms the air above it, and produces water vapour. The warmed air
rises; as it rises it cools, and the water eventually re-condenses,
forming clouds and rain. At its highest point, the air is cooled down
further by the freezing blackness of space. The cold air sinks again.
This great solar- powered pump drives air round and round in great
convection rolls. From our point of view on the surface, these
convection rolls produce the winds. Wind is second-hand solar energy. As
wind rushes across open water, it generates waves. Waves are thus
third-hand solar energy. (The waves that crash on a beach are nothing to
do with the tides.)

In open water, waves are generated whenever the wind speed is greater
than about 0.5 m/s. The wave crests move at about the speed of the wind
that creates them, and in the same direction. The *wavelength* of the
waves (the distance between crests) and the *period* (the time between
crests) de- pend on the speed of the wind. The longer the wind blows
for, and the greater the expanse of water over which the wind blows, the
greater the *height* of the waves stroked up by the wind. Thus since the
prevailing winds over the Atlantic go from west to east, the waves
arriving on the At- lantic coast of Europe are often especially big.
(The waves on the east coast of the British Isles are usually much
smaller, so my estimates of potential wave power will focus on the
resource in the Atlantic Ocean.)

Waves have long memory and will keep going in the same direction for
days after the wind stopped blowing, until they bump into something. In
seas where the direction of the wind changes frequently, waves born on
different days form a superposed jumble, travelling in different
directions.

If waves travelling in a particular direction encounter objects that ab-
sorb energy from the waves – for example, a row of islands with sandy
beaches – then the seas beyond the object are calmer. The objects cast a
shadow, and there’s less energy in the waves that get by. So, whereas
sun- light delivers a power per unit *area*, waves deliver a power per
unit *length* of coastline. You can’t have your cake and eat it. You
can’t collect wave energy two miles off-shore *and* one mile off-shore.
Or rather, you can try, but the two-mile facility will absorb energy
that would have gone to the one-mile facility, and it won’t be replaced.
The fetch required for wind to stroke up big waves is thousands of
miles.

We can find an upper bound on the maximum conceivable power that could
be obtained from wave power by estimating the incoming power

![](figure84.png)

![](figure85.png)

![](figure83.png)

Figure 12.1. A Pelamis wave energy collector is a sea snake made of four
sections. It faces nose-on towards the incoming waves. The waves make
the snake flex, and these motions are resisted by hydraulic generators.
The peak power from one snake is 750 kW; in the best Atlantic location
one snake would deliver 300 kW on average. Photo from Pelamis wave power
www.pelamiswave.com.

per unit length of exposed coastline, and multiplying by the length of
coastline. We ignore the question of what mechanism could collect all
this power, and start by working out how much power it is.

The power of Atlantic waves has been measured: it’s about 40 kW per
metre of exposed coastline. That sounds like a lot of power! If every-
one owned a metre of coastline and could harness their whole 40 kW, that
would be plenty of power to cover modern consumption. However, *our
population is too big*. There is not enough Atlantic-facing coastline
for ev- eryone to have their own metre.

As the map on p73 shows, Britannia rules about 1000 km of Atlantic
coastline (one million metres), which is 1⁄60 m per person. So the total
raw incoming power is 16 kWh per day per person. If we extracted all
this power, the Atlantic, at the seaside, would be as flat as a
millpond. Practical systems won’t manage to extract all the power, and
some of the power will inevitably be lost during conversion from
mechanical energy to electricity. Let’s assume that brilliant
wave-machines are 50%-efficient at turning the incoming wave power into
electricity, and that we are able to pack wave- machines along 500 km of
Atlantic-facing coastline. That would mean we could deliver 25% of this
theoretical bound. That’s 4 kWh per day per person. As usual, I’m
intentionally making pretty extreme assumptions to boost the green stack
– I expect the assumption that we could line *half of the Atlantic
coastline* with wave absorbers will sound bananas to many readers.

How do the numbers assumed in this calculation compare with today’s
technology? As I write, there are just three wave machines working in
deep water: three Pelamis wave energy collectors (figure 12.1) built in
Scotland and deployed off Portugal. No actual performance results have
been pub- lished, but the makers of the Pelamis (“designed with survival
as the key objective before power capture efficiency”) predict that a
two-kilometre- long wave-farm consisting of 40 of their sea-snakes would
deliver 6 kW per metre of wave-farm. Using this number in the previous
calculation, the power delivered by 500 kilometres of wave-farm is
reduced to 1.2 kWh per day per person. While wave power may be useful
for small commu- nities on remote islands, I suspect it can’t play a
significant role in the solution to Britain’s sustainable energy
problem.

What’s the weight of a Pelamis, and how much steel does it contain? One
snake with a maximum power of 750 kW weighs 700 tons, including 350 tons
of ballast. So it has about 350 tons of steel. That’s a weight-to- power
ratio of roughly 500 kg per kW (peak). We can compare this with the
steel requirements for offshore wind: an offshore wind-turbine with a
maximum power of 3 MW weighs 500 tons, including its foundation. That’s
a weight-to-power ratio of about 170 kg per kW, one third of the wave
machine’s. The Pelamis is a first prototype; presumably with further
investment and development in wave technology, the weight-to-power ra-
tio would fall.

![](figure86.png)

Figure 12.2. Wave.

Notes and further reading
-------------------------

page no.

73*Waves are generated whenever the wind speed is greater than about 0.5
m/s. The wave crests move at about the speed of the wind that creates
them*. The simplest theory of wave-production (Faber, 1995, p. 337)
suggests that (for small waves) the wave crests move at about half the
speed of the wind that creates them. It’s found empirically however
that, the longer the wind blows for, the longer the wavelength of the
dominant waves present, and the greater their velocity. The
characteristic speed of fully-developed seas is almost ex- actly equal
to the wind-speed 20 metres above the sea surface (Mollison, 1986).

–*The waves on the east coast of the British Isles are usually much
smaller*. Whereas the wave power at Lewis (Atlantic) is 42 kW/m, the
powers at the east-coast sites are: Peterhead: 4 kW/m; Scarborough: 8
kW/m; Cromer: 5 kW/m. Source: Sinden (2005). Sinden says: “The North Sea
Region expe- riences a very low energy wave environment.”

74*Atlantic wave power is 40 kW per metre of exposed coastline*.
(Chapter F explains how we can estimate this power using a few facts
about waves.) This number has a firm basis in the literature on Atlantic
wave power (Mollison et al., 1976; Mollison, 1986, 1991). From Mollison
(1986), for example: “the large scale resource of the NE Atlantic, from
Iceland to North Portugal, has a net resource of 40–50 MW/km, of which
20–30 MW/km is potentially economically extractable.” At any point in
the open ocean, three powers per unit length can be distinguished: the
total power passing through that point in all directions (63 kW/m on
average at the Isles of Scilly and 67 kW/m off Uist); the net power
intercepted by a directional collecting de- vice oriented in the optimal
direction (47 kW/m and 45 kW/m respectively); and the power per unit
coastline, which takes into account the misalignment between the optimal
orientation of a directional collector and the coastline (for example in
Portugal the optimal orientation faces northwest and the coastline faces
west).

–*Practical systems won’t manage to extract all the power, and some of
the power will inevitably be lost during conversion from mechanical
energy to electricity*. The UK’s first grid-connected wave machine, the
Limpet on Islay, provides a striking example of these losses. When it
was designed its con- version efficiency from wave power to grid power
was estimated to be 48%, and the average power output was predicted to
be 200 kW. However losses in the capture system, flywheels and
electrical components mean the actual average output is 21 kW – just
5%[^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#75) of the
predicted output (Wavegen, 2002).

![](figure411.png)

Photo by Terry Cavner.

![](figure88.png)

13   Food and farming
=====================

> Modern agriculture is the use of land to convert petroleum into food.
>
> Albert Bartlett

We’ve already discussed in Chapter 6 how much sustainable power could be
*produced* through greenery; in this chapter we discuss how much power
is currently *consumed* in giving us our daily bread.

A moderately active person with a weight of 65 kg consumes food with a
chemical energy content of about 2600 “Calories” per day. A “Calorie,”
in food circles, is actually 1000 chemist’s calories (1 kcal). 2600
“Calories” per day is about 3 kWh per day. Most of this energy
eventually escapes from the body as heat, so one function of a typical
person is to act as a space heaterwith an output of a little over 100 W,
a medium-power lightbulb. Put 10 people in a small cold room, and you
can switch off the 1 kW convection heater.

How much energy do we actually consume in order to get our 3 kWh per
day? If we enlarge our viewpoint to include the inevitable upstream
costs of food production, then we may find that our energy footprint is
substantially bigger. It depends if we are vegan, vegetarian or
carnivore.

The vegan has the smallest inevitable footprint: 3 kWh per day of en-
ergy from the plants he eats.

### The energy cost of drinking milk

I love milk. If I drinka-pinta-milka-day, what energy does that require?
A typical dairy cow produces 16 litres of milk per day. So my one pint
per day (half a litre per day) requires that I employ 1⁄32 of a cow. Oh,
hang on – I love cheese too. And to make 1 kg of Irish Cheddar takes
about 9 kg of milk. So consuming 50 g of cheese per day requires the
production of an extra 450 g of milk. OK: my milk and cheese habit
requires that I employ 1⁄16 of a cow. And how much power does it take to
run a cow? Well, if a cow weighing 450 kg has similar energy
requirements per kilogram to a human (whose 65 kg burns 3 kWh per day)
then the cow must be using about 21 kWh/d. Does this extrapolation from
human to cow make you uneasy? Let’s check these numbers:
www.dairyaustralia.com.au says that a suckling cow of weight 450 kg
needs 85 MJ/d, which is 24 kWh/d. Great, our guess wasn’t far off! So my
1⁄16 share of a cow has an energy consumption of about 1.5 kWh per day.
This figure ignores other energy costs involved in persuading the cow to
make milk and the milk to turn to cheese, and of getting the milk and
cheese to travel from her to me. We’ll cover some of these costs when we
discuss freight and supermarkets in Chapter 15.

![](figure89.png)

Figure 13.1. A salad Niçoise.

![](figure412.png)

Figure 13.2. Minimum energy requirement of one person.

![](figure90.png)

Figure 13.3. Milk and cheese.

### Eggs

A “layer” (a chicken that lays eggs) eats about 110 g of chicken feed
per day. Assuming that chicken feed has a metabolizable energy content
of 3.3 kWh per kg, that’s a power consumption of 0.4 kWh per day per
chicken. Layers yield on average 290 eggs per year. So eating two eggs a
day requires a power of 1 kWh per day. Each egg itself contains 80 kcal,
which is about 0.1 kWh. So from an energy point of view, egg production
is 20% efficient.

### The energy cost of eating meat

Let’s say an enthusiastic meat-eater eats about half a pound a day (227
g). (This is the average meat consumption of Americans.) To work out the
power required to maintain the meat-eater’s animals as they mature and
wait for the chop, we need to know for how long the animals are around,
consuming energy. Chicken, pork, or beef?

Chicken, sir? Every chicken you eat was clucking around being a chicken
for roughly 50 days. So the steady consumption of half a pound a day of
chicken requires about 25 pounds of chicken to be alive, preparing to be
eaten. And those 25 pounds of chicken consume energy.

Pork, madam? Pigs are around for longer – maybe 400 days from birth to
bacon – so the steady consumption of half a pound a day of pork re-
quires about 200 pounds of pork to be alive, preparing to be eaten.

Cow? Beef production involves the longest lead times. It takes about
1000 days of cow-time to create a steak. So the steady consumption of
half a pound a day of beef requires about 500 pounds of beef to be
alive, preparing to be eaten.

To condense all these ideas down to a single number, let’s assume you
eat half a pound (227 g) per day of meat, made up of equal quantities of
chicken, pork, and beef. This meat habit requires the perpetual
sustenance of 8 pounds of chicken meat, 70 pounds of pork meat, and 170
pounds of cow meat. That’s a total of 110 kg of meat, or 170 kg of
animal (since about two thirds of the animal gets turned into meat). And
if the 170 kg of animal has similar power requirements to a human (whose
65 kg burns 3 kWh/d) then the power required to fuel the meat habit is

170kg ×

3 kWh/d

≈ 8 kWh/d

65 kg

I’ve again taken the physiological liberty of assuming “animals are like
humans;” a more accurate estimate of the energy to make chicken is in
this chapter’s endnotes. No matter, I only want a ballpark estimate, and
here it is. The power required to make the food for a typical consumer
of vegetables, dairy, eggs, and meat is 1.5 + 1.5 + 1 + 8 = 12 kWh per
day. (The daily calorific balance of this rough diet is 1.5 kWh from
vegetables;

![](figure91.png)

Figure 13.4. Two eggs per day.

![](figure92.png)

Figure 13.5. Eating meat requires extra power because we have to feed
the queue of animals lining up to be eaten by the human.

0.7 kWh from dairy; 0.2 kWh from eggs; and 0.5 kWh from meat – a total
of 2.9 kWh per day.)

This number does not include any of the power costs associated with
farming, fertilizing, processing, refrigerating, and transporting the
food. We’ll estimate some of those costs below, and some in Chapter 15.

Do these calculations give an argument in favour of vegetarianism, on
the grounds of lower energy consumption? It depends on where the ani-
mals feed. Take the steep hills and mountains of Wales, for example.
Could the land be used for anything other than grazing? Either these
rocky pas- turelands are used to sustain sheep, or they are not used to
help feed humans. You can think of these natural green slopes as
maintenance-free biofuel plantations, and the sheep as automated
self-replicating biofuel- harvesting machines. The energy losses between
sunlight and mutton are substantial, but there is probably no better way
of capturing solar power in such places. (I’m not sure whether this
argument for sheep-farming in Wales actually adds up: during the worst
weather, Welsh sheep are moved to lower fields where their diet is
supplemented with soya feed and other food grown with the help of
energy-intensive fertilizers; what’s the true energy cost? I don’t
know.) Similar arguments can be made in favour of carnivory for places
such as the scrublands of Africa and the grasslands of Australia; and in
favour of dairy consumption in India, where millions of cows are fed on
by-products of rice and maize farming.

On the other hand, where animals are reared in cages and fed grain that
humans could have eaten, there’s no question that it would be more
energy-efficient to cut out the middlehen or middlesow, and feed the
grain directly to humans.

### Fertilizer and other energy costs in farming

The embodied energy in Europe’s fertilizers is about 2 kWh per day per
person. According to a report to DEFRA by the University of Warwick,
farming in the UK in 2005 used an energy of 0.9 kWh per day per person
for farm vehicles, machinery, heating (especially greenhouses),
lighting, ventilation, and refrigeration.

### The energy cost of Tiddles, Fido, and Shadowfax

Animal companions! Are you the servant of a dog, a cat, or a horse?

There are perhaps 8 million cats in Britain. Let’s assume you look after
one of them. The energy cost of Tiddles? If she eats 50 g of meat per
day (chicken, pork, and beef), then the last section’s calculation says
that the power required to make Tiddles’ food is just shy of 2 kWh per
day. A vegetarian cat would require less.

Similarly if your dog Fido eats 200 g of meat per day, and carbohydrates

![](figure93.png)

Figure 13.6. Will harvest energy crops for food.

![](figure94.png)

Figure 13.7. The power required for animal companions’ food.

amounting to 1 kWh per day, then the power required to make his food is
about 9 kWh per day.

Shadowfax the horse weighs about 400 kg and consumes 17 kWh per day.

### Mythconceptions

#### I heard that the energy footprint of food is so big that “it’s better to drive than to walk.”

Whether this is true depends on your diet. It’s certainly possible to
find food whose fossil-fuel energy footprint is bigger than the energy
delivered to the human. A bag of crisps, for example, has an embodied
energy of 1.4 kWh of fossil fuel per kWh of chemical energy eaten. The
embodied energy of meat is higher. According to a study from the
University of Exeter, the typical diet has an embodied energy of roughly
6 kWh per kWh eaten. To figure out whether driving a car or walking uses
less energy, we need to know the transport efficiency of each mode. For
the typical car of Chapter 3, the energy cost was 80 kWh per 100 km.
Walking uses a net energy of 3.6 kWh per 100 km – 22 times less. So if
you live entirely on food whose footprint is greater than 22 kWh per kWh
then, yes, the energy cost of getting you from A to B in a
fossil-fuel-powered vehicle is less than if you go under your own steam.
But if you have a typical diet (6 kWh per kWh) then “it’s better to
drive than to walk” is a myth. Walking uses one quarter as much energy.

Notes and further reading
-------------------------

page no.

76*A typical dairy cow produces 16 litres of milk per day*. There are
2.3 million dairy cows in the UK, each producing around 5900 litres per
year. Half of all milk produced by cows is sold as liquid milk.
www.ukagriculture.com, www.vegsoc.org/info/cattle.html

77*It takes about 1000 days of cow-time to create a steak*. 33 months
from conception to slaughterhouse: 9 months’ gestation and 24 months’
rearing. www.shabdenparkfarm.com/farming/cattle.htm

–*Chicken*. A full-grown (20-week old) layer weighs 1.5 or 1.6 kg. Its
feed has an energy content of 2850 kcal per kg, which is 3.3 kWh per kg,
and its feed consumption rises to 340 g per week when 6 weeks old, and
to 500 g per week when aged 20 weeks. Once laying, the typical feed
required is 110 g per day. Meat chickens’ feed has an energy content of
3.7 kWh per kg. Energy con- sumption is 400–450 kcal per day per hen
(0.5 kWh/d per hen), with 2 kg being a typical body weight. A meat
chicken weighing 2.95 kg consumes a total of 5.32 kg of feed [5h69fm].
So the embodied energy of a meat chicken is about 6.7 kWh per kg of
animal, or 10 kWh per kg of eaten meat.

![](figure95.png)

Figure 13.8. Food and farming.

If I’d used this number instead of my rough guess, the energy
contribution of the chicken would have been bumped up a little. But
given that the mixed-meat diet’s energy footprint is dominated by the
beef, it really doesn’t matter that I underestimated the chickens.
Sources: Subcommit- tee on Poultry Nutrition, National Research Council
(1994), www.nap.edu/ openbook.php?isbn=0309048923, MacDonald (2008), and
www.statistics. gov.uk/statbase/datasets2.asp.

77*let’s assume you eat half a pound (227 g) a day of meat, made up of
equal quantities of chicken, pork, and beef*. This is close to the
average meat con- sumption in America, which is 251 g per day – made up
of 108 g chicken, 81 g beef, and 62 g pork (MacDonald, 2008).

78*The embodied energy in Europe’s fertilizers is about 2 kWh per day
per per- son*. In 1998–9, Western Europe used 17.6 Mt per year of
fertilizers: 10Mt of nitrates, 3.5 Mt of phosphate and 4.1 Mt potash.
These fertilizers have energy footprints of 21.7, 4.9, and 3.8 kWh per
kg respectively. Sharing this energy out between 375 million people, we
find a total footprint of 1.8 kWh per day per person. Sources: Gellings
and Parmenter (2004), International Fertilizer Industry Association
[5pwojp].

–*Farming in the UK in 2005 used an energy of 0.9 kWh per day per
person*. Source: Warwick HRI (2007).

79*A bag of crisps has an embodied energy of 1.4 kWh of fossil fuel per
kWh of chemical energy eaten*. I estimated this energy from the carbon
footprint of a bag of crisps: 75 g CO~2~ for a standard 35 g bag
[5bj8k3]. Of this footprint, 44% is associated with farming, 30% with
processing, 15% packaging, and 11% transport and disposal. The chemical
energy delivered to the consumer is 770 kJ. So this food has a carbon
footprint of 350 g per kWh. Assuming that most of this carbon footprint
is from fossil fuels at 250 g CO~2~ per kWh, the energy footprint of the
crisps is 1.4 kWh of fossil fuel per kWh of chemical energy eaten.

–*The typical diet has an embodied energy of roughly 6 kWh per kWh
eaten*. Coley (2001) estimates the embodied energy in a typical diet is
5.75 times the derived energy. Walking has a CO~2~ footprint of 42 g/km;
cycling, 30 g/km. For comparison, driving an average car emits 183 g/km.

–*Walking uses 3.6 kWh per 100 km*. A walking human uses a total of 6.6
kWh per 100 km [3s576h]; we subtract off the resting energy to get the
energy footprint of walking (Coley, 2001).

Further reading: Weber and Matthews (2008).

14   Tide {.green}
=========

The moon and earth are in a whirling, pirouetting dance around the sun.
Together they tour the sun once every year, at the same time whirling
around each other once every 28 days. The moon also turns around once
every 28 days so that she always shows the same face to her dancing
part- ner, the earth. The prima donna earth doesn’t return the
compliment; she pirouettes once every day. This dance is held together
by the force of grav- ity: every bit of the earth, moon, and sun is
pulled towards every other bit of earth, moon, and sun. The sum of all
these forces is *almost* exactly what’s required to keep the whirling
dance on course. But there are very slight imbalances between the
gravitational forces and the forces required to maintain the dance. It
is these imbalances that give rise to the tides.

The imbalances associated with the whirling of the moon and earth around
each other are about three times as big as the imbalances associated
with the earth’s slower dance around the sun, so the size of the tides
varies with the phase of the moon, as the moon and sun pass in and out
of alignment. At full moon and new moon (when the moon and sun are in
line with each other) the imbalances reinforce each other, and the
resulting big tides are called *spring tides*. (Spring tides are *not*
“tides that occur at spring-time;” spring tides happen every two weeks
like clockwork.) At the intervening half moons, the imbalances partly
cancel and the tides are smaller; these smaller tides are called *neap
tides*. Spring tides have roughly twice the amplitude of neap tides: the
spring high tides are twice as high above mean sea level as neap high
tides, the spring low tides are twice as low as neap low tides, and the
tidal currents are twice as big at springs as at neaps.

Why are there two high tides and two low tides per day? Well, if the
earth were a perfect sphere, a smooth billiard ball covered by oceans,
the tidal effect of the earth-moon whirling would be to deform the wa-
ter slightly towards and away from the moon, making the water slightly
rugby-ball shaped (figure 14.1). Someone living on the equator of this
billiard-ball earth, spinning round once per day within the water
cocoon, would notice the water level going up and down twice per day: up
once as he passed under the nose of the rugby-ball, and up a second time
as he passed under its tail. This cartoon explanation is some way from
reality. In reality, the earth is not smooth, and it is not uniformly
covered by water (as you may have noticed). Two humps of water cannot
whoosh round the earth once per day because the continents get in the
way. The true behaviour of the tides is thus more complicated. In a
large body of water such as the Atlantic Ocean, tidal crests and troughs
form but, unable to whoosh round the earth, they do the next best thing:
they whoosh around the perimeter of the Ocean. In the North Atlantic
there are two crests and two troughs, all circling the Atlantic in an
anticlockwise direction once a

![](figure96.png)

Figure 14.1. An ocean covering a billiard-ball earth. We’re looking down
on the North pole, and the moon is 60 cm off the page to the right. The
earth spins once per day inside a rugby-ball-shaped shell of water. The
oceans are stretched towards and away from the moon because the
gravitational forces supplied by the moon don’t perfectly match the
required centripetal force to keep the earth and moon whirling around
their common centre of gravity. Someone standing on the equator
(rotating as indicated by the arrow) will experience two high waters and
two low waters per day.

day. Here in Britain we don’t directly see these Atlantic crests and
troughs – we are set back from the Atlantic proper, separated from it by
a few hundred miles of paddling pool called the continental shelf. Each
time one of the crests whooshes by in the Atlantic proper, it sends a
crest up our paddling pool. Similarly each Atlantic trough sends a
trough up the paddling pool. Consecutive crests and troughs are
separated by six hours. Or to be more precise, by six and a quarter
hours, since the time between moon-rises is about 25, not 24 hours.

The speed at which the crests and troughs travel varies with the depth
of the paddling pool. The shallower the paddling pool gets, the slower
the crests and troughs travel and the larger they get. Out in the ocean,
the tides are just a foot or two in height. Arriving in European
estuaries, the tidal range is often as big as four metres. In the
northern hemisphere, the Coriolis force (a force, associated with the
rotation of the earth, that acts only on moving objects) makes all tidal
crests and troughs tend to hug the right-hand bank as they go. For
example, the tides in the English channel are bigger on the French side.
Similarly, the crests and troughs entering the North Sea around the
Orkneys hug the British side, travelling down to the Thames Estuary then
turning left at the Netherlands to pay their respects to Denmark.

Tidal energy is sometimes called lunar energy, since it’s mainly thanks
to the moon that the water sloshes around so. Much of the tidal energy,
however, is really coming from the rotational energy of the spinning
earth. The earth is very gradually slowing down.

So, how can we put tidal energy to use, and how much power could we
extract?

Rough estimates of tidal power
------------------------------

When you think of tidal power, you might think of an artificial pool
next to the sea, with a water-wheel that is turned as the pool fills or
empties (figures 14.2 and 14.3). Chapter G shows how to estimate the
power avail- able from such tide-pools. Assuming a range of 4 m, a
typical range in many European estuaries, the maximum power of an
artificial tide-pool that’s filled rapidly at high tide and emptied
rapidly at low tide, generating power from both flow directions, is
about 3 W/m^2^. This is the same as the power per unit area of an
offshore wind farm. And we already know how big offshore wind farms need
to be to make a difference. *They need to be country-sized*. So
similarly, to make tide-pools capable of producing power comparable to
Britain’s total consumption, we’d need the total area of the tide-pools
to be similar to the area of Britain.

Amazingly, Britain is already supplied with a natural tide-pool of just
the required dimensions. This tide-pool is known as the North Sea
(figure 14.5). If we simply insert generators in appropriate spots,
significant power can be extracted. The generators might look like
underwater wind

![](figure97.png)

Figure 14.2. Woodbridge tide-pool and tide-mill. Photos kindly provided
by Ted Evans.

![](figure99.png)

Figure 14.3. An artificial tide-pool. The pool was filled at high tide,
and now it’s low tide. We let the water out through the electricity
generator to turn the water’s potential energy into electricity.

  tidal range   power density
  ------------- ---------------
  2 m           1 W/m^2^
  **4** m       **3** W/m^2^
  6 m           7 W/m^2^
  8 m           13 W/m^2^

Table 14.4. Power density (power per unit area) of tide-pools, assuming
generation from both the rising and the falling tide.

![](figure98.png)

mills. Because the density of water is roughly 1000 times that of air,
the power of water flow is 1000 times greater than the power of wind at
the same speed. We’ll come back to tide farms in a moment, but first
let’s discuss how much raw tidal energy rolls around Britain every day.

### Raw incoming tidal power

The tides around Britain are genuine tidal waves – unlike tsunamis,
which are called “tidal waves,” but are nothing to do with tides. Follow
a high tide as it rolls in from the Atlantic. The time of high tide
becomes progress- ively later as we move east up the English channel
from the Isles of Scilly to Portsmouth and on to Dover. The crest of the
tidal wave progresses up the channel at about 70 km/h. (The crest of the
wave moves much faster than the water itself, just as ordinary waves on
the sea move faster than the water.) Similarly, a high tide moves
clockwise round Scotland, rolling down the North Sea from Wick to
Berwick and on to Hull at a speed of about 100 km/h. These two high
tides converge on the Thames Estuary. By coincidence, the Scottish crest
arrives about 12 hours later than the crest that came via Dover, so it
arrives in near-synchrony with the next high tide via Dover, and London
receives the normal two high tides per day.

The power we can extract from tides can never be more than the total
power of these tidal waves from the Atlantic. The total power crossing
the lines in figure 14.6 has been measured; on average it amounts to 100
kWh per day per person. If we imagine extracting 10% of this incident
energy, and if the conversion and transmission processes are 50%
efficient, the average power delivered would be 5 kWh per day per
person.

This is a tentative first guess, made without specifying any technical

Figure 14.5. The British Isles are in a fortunate position: the North
Sea forms a natural tide-pool, in and out of which great sloshes of
water pour twice a day.

![](figure100.png)

Figure 14.6. The average incoming power of lunar tidal waves crossing
these two lines has been measured to be 250 GW. This raw power, shared
between 60 million people, is 100 kWh per day per person.

details. Now let’s estimate the power that could be delivered by three
specific solutions: tide farms, barrages, and offshore tidal lagoons.

Tidal stream farms
------------------

One way to extract tidal energy would be to build tide farms, just like
wind farms. The first such underwater windmill, or “tidal-stream”
generator, to be connected to the grid was a “300 kW” turbine, installed
in 2003 near the northerly city of Hammerfest, Norway. Detailed power
production results have not been published, and no-one has yet built a
tide farm with more than one turbine, so we’re going to have to rely on
physics and guesswork to predict how much power tide farms could
produce. Assuming that the rules for laying out a sensible tide farm are
similar to those for wind farms, and that the efficiency of the tide
turbines will be like that of the best wind turbines, table 14.7 shows
the power of a tide farm for a few tidal currents.

Given that tidal currents of 2 to 3 knots are common, there are many
places around the British Isles where the power per unit area of tide
farm would be 6 W/m^2^ or more. This power per unit area can be compared
to our estimates for wind farms (2–3 W/m^2^) and for photovoltaic solar
farms (5–10 W/m^2^).

Tide power is not to be sneezed at! How would it add up, if we assume
that there are no economic obstacles to the exploitation of tidal power
at all the hot spots around the UK? Chapter G lists the flow speeds in
the best areas around the UK, and estimates that 9 kWh/d per person
could be extracted.

Barrages
--------

Tidal barrages are a proven technology. The famous barrage at La Rance
in France, where the tidal range is a whopping 8 metres on average, has
produced an average power of 60 MW since 1966. The tidal range in the
Severn Estuary is also unusually large. At Cardiff the range is 11.3 m
at spring tides, and 5.8 m at neaps. If a barrage were put across the
mouth of the Severn Estuary (from Weston-super-Mare to Cardiff), it
would make a 500 km^2^ tide-pool (figure 14.8). Notice how much bigger
this pool is than the estuary at La Rance. What power could this
tide-pool deliver, if we let the water in and out at the ideal times,
generating on both the flood and the ebb? According to the theoretical
numbers from table 14.4, when the range is 11.3 m, the average power
contributed by the barrage (at 30 W/m^2^) would be at most 14.5 GW, or
**5.8 kWh/d per person**. When the range is 5.8 m, the average power
contributed by the barrage (at 8 W/m^2^) would be at most 3.9 GW, or
**1.6 kWh/d per person**. These numbers assume that the water is let in
in a single pulse at the peak of high tide, and let out in a single
pulse at low tide. In practice, the in-flow and out-flow would be spread
over a few hours, which would reduce the power delivered a little.

speed

power density (W/m^2^)

(m/s)

(knots)

0.5

1

1

1

2

8

2

4

60

3

6

200

4

8

500

5

10

1000

Table 14.7. Tide farm power density (in watts per square metre of
sea-floor) as a function of flow speed. (1 knot = 1 nautical mile per
hour = 0.514 m/s.)

![](figure101.png)

The current proposals for the barrage will generate power in one
direction only. This reduces the power delivered by another 50%. The
engineers’ reports on the proposed Severn barrage say that, generating
on the ebb alone, it would contribute 0.8 kWh/d per person on average.
The barrage would also provide protection from flooding valued at about
£120M per year.

Tidal lagoons
-------------

Tidal lagoons are created by building walls in the sea; they can then be
used like artificial estuaries. The required conditions for building
lagoons are that the water must be shallow and the tidal range must be
large. Economies of scale apply: big tidal lagoons make cheaper
electricity than small ones. The two main locations for large tidal
lagoons in Britain are the Wash on the east coast, and the waters off
Blackpool on the west coast (figure 14.9). Smaller facilities could be
built in north Wales, Lincolnshire, southwest Wales, and east Sussex.

If two lagoons are built in one location, a neat trick can be used to
boost the power delivered and to enable the lagoons to deliver power on
demand at any time, independent of the state of the tide. One lagoon can
be designated the “high” lagoon, and the other the “low” lagoon. At low
tide, some power generated by the emptying high lagoon can be used to

Figure 14.8. The Severn barrage proposals (bottom left), and Strangford
Lough, Northern Ireland (top left), shown on the same scale as the
barrage at La Rance (bottom right). The map shows two proposed locations
for a Severn barrage. A barrage at Weston-super-Mare would deliver an
average power of 2 GW (0.8 kWh/d per person). The outer alternative
would deliver twice as much. There is a big tidal resource in Northern
Ireland at Strangford Lough. Strangford Lough’s area is 150 km^2^; the
tidal range in the Irish Sea outside is 4.5 m at springs and 1.5 m at
neaps – sadly not as big as the range at La Rance or the Severn. The raw
power of the natural tide-pool at Strangford Lough is roughly 150 MW,
which, shared between the 1.7 million people of Northern Ireland, comes
to 2 kWh/d per person. Strangford Lough is the location of the first
grid-connected tidal stream generator in the UK.

pump water *out* of the low lagoon, making its level even lower than low
water. The energy required to pump down the level of the low lagoon is
then repaid with interest at high tide, when power is generated by
letting water into the low lagoon. Similarly, extra water can be pumped
into the high lagoon at high tide, using energy generated by the low
lagoon. Whatever state the tide is in, one lagoon or the other would be
able to generate power. Such a pair of tidal lagoons could also work as
a pumped storage facility, storing excess energy from the electricity
grid.

The average power per unit area of tidal lagoons in British waters could
be 4.5W/m^2^, so if tidal lagoons with a total area of 800 km^2^ were
created (as indicated in figure 14.9), the power generated would be 1.5
kWh/d per person.

Beauties of tide
----------------

Totting everything up, the barrage, the lagoons, and the tidal stream
farms could deliver something like 11 kWh/d per person (figure 14.10).

Tide power has never been used on an industrial scale in Britain, so
it’s hard to know what economic and technical challenges will be raised
as we build and maintain tide-turbines – corrosion, silt accumulation,
entanglement with flotsam? But here are seven reasons for being excited
about tidal power in the British Isles. 1. Tidal power is completely
predictable; unlike wind and sun, tidal power is a renewable on which
one could depend; it works day and night all year round; using tidal
lagoons, energy can be stored so that power can be delivered on demand.
2. Successive high and low tides take about 12 hours to progress around
the British Isles, so the strongest currents off Anglesey, Islay, Orkney
and Dover occur at different times from each other; thus, together, a
collection of tide farms could produce a more constant contribution to
the electrical grid than one tide farm, albeit a contribution that
wanders up and down with the phase of the moon. 3. Tidal power will last
for millions of years. 4. It doesn’t require high-cost hardware, in
contrast to solar photovoltaic power. 5. Moreover, because the power
density of a typical tidal flow is greater than the power density of a
typical wind, a 1 MW tide turbine is smaller in size than a 1 MW wind
turbine; perhaps tide turbines could therefore be cheaper than wind
turbines. 6. Life below the waves is peaceful; there is no such thing as
a freak tidal storm; so, unlike wind turbines, which require costly
engineering to withstand rare windstorms, underwater tide turbines will
not require big safety factors in their design. 7. Humans mostly live on
the land, and they can’t see under the sea, so objections to the visual
impact of tide turbines should be less strong than the objections to
wind turbines.

![](figure102.png)

Figure 14.9. Two tidal lagoons, each with an area of 400 km^2^, one off
Blackpool, and one in the Wash. The Severn estuary is also highlighted
for comparison.

15   Stuff {.red}
==========

One of the main sinks of energy in the “developed” world is the creation
of stuff. In its natural life cycle, stuff passes through three stages.
First, a new-born stuff is displayed in shiny packaging on a shelf in a
shop. At this stage, stuff is called “goods.” As soon as the stuff is
taken home and sheds its packaging, it undergoes a transformation from
“goods” to its second form, “clutter.” The clutter lives with its owner
for a period of months or years. During this period, the clutter is
largely ignored by its owner, who is off at the shops buying more goods.
Eventually, by a miracle of modern alchemy, the clutter is transformed
into its final form, rubbish. To the untrained eye, it can be difficult
to distinguish this “rubbish” from the highly desirable “good” that it
used to be. Nonetheless, at this stage the discerning owner pays the
dustman to transport the stuff away.

Let’s say we want to understand the full energy-cost of a stuff, perhaps
with a view to designing better stuff. This is called life-cycle
analysis. It’s conventional to chop the energy-cost of anything from a
hair-dryer to a cruise-ship into four chunks:

**Phase R:** Making **raw materials**. This phase involves digging
minerals out of the ground, melting them, purifying them, and modifying
them into manufacturers’ lego: plastics, glasses, metals, and ceramics,
for example. The energy costs of this phase include the transportation
costs of trundling the raw materials to their next destination.

**Phase P: Production**. In this phase, the raw materials are processed
into a manufactured product. The factory where the hair-dryer’s coils
are wound, its graceful lines moulded, and its components carefully
snapped together, uses heat and light. The energy costs of this phase
include packaging and more transportation.

**Phase U: Use**. Hair-dryers and cruise-ships both guzzle energy when
they’re used as intended.

**Phase D: Disposal**. This phase includes the energy cost of putting
the stuff back in a hole in the ground (landfill), or of turning the
stuff back into raw materials (recycling); and of cleaning up all the
pollution associated with the stuff.

To understand how much energy a stuff’s life requires, we should
estimate the energy costs of all four phases and add them up. Usually
one of these four phases dominates the total energy cost, so to get a
reasonable estimate of the total energy cost we need accurate estimates
only of the cost of that dominant phase. If we wish to redesign a stuff
so as to reduce its total energy cost, we should usually focus on
reducing the cost of the dominant phase, while making sure that
energy-savings in that phase

![](figure105.png)

Figure 15.1. Selfridges’ rubbish advertisement.

embodied energy (kWh per kg)

fossil fuel

10

wood

5

paper

10

glass

7

PET plastic

30

aluminium

40

steel

6

Table 15.2. Embodied energy of materials.

aren’t being undone by accompanying increases in the energy costs of the
other three phases.

Rather than estimating in detail how much power the perpetual produc-
tion and transport of all stuff requires, let’s first cover just a few
common examples: drink containers, computers, batteries, junk mail,
cars, and houses. This chapter focuses on the energy costs of phases R
and P. These energy costs are sometimes called the “embodied” or
“embedded” energy of the stuff – slightly confusing names, since usually
that energy is neither literally embodied nor embedded in the stuff.

### Drink containers

Let’s assume you have a coke habit: you drink five cans of multinational
chemicals per day, and throw the aluminium cans away. For this stuff,
it’s the raw material phase that dominates. The production of metals is
energy intensive, especially for aluminium. Making one aluminium
drinks-can needs 0.6 kWh. So a five-a-day habit wastes energy at a rate
of 3 kWh/d.

As for a 500 ml water bottle made of PET (which weighs 25 g), the
embodied energy is 0.7 kWh – just as bad as an aluminium can!

### Other packaging

The average Brit throws away 400 g of packaging per day – mainly food
packaging. The embodied energy content of packaging ranges from 7 to 20
kWh per kg as we run through the spectrum from glass and paper to
plastics and steel cans. Taking the typical embodied energy content to
be 10 kWh/kg, we deduce that the energy footprint of packaging is 4
kWh/d. A little of this embodied energy is recoverable by waste
incineration, as we’ll discuss in Chapter 27.

### Computers

Making a personal computer costs 1800 kWh of energy. So if you buy a new
computer every two years, that corresponds to a power consumption of 2.5
kWh per day.

### Batteries

The energy cost of making a rechargeable nickel-cadmium AA battery,
storing 0.001 kWh of electrical energy and having a mass of 25 g, is 1.4
kWh (phases R and P). If the energy cost of disposable batteries is
similar, throwing away two AA batteries per month uses about 0.1 kWh/d.
The energy cost of batteries is thus likely to be a minor item in your
stack of energy consumption.

![](figure413.png)

![](figure106.png)

Figure 15.3. Five aluminium cans per day is 3 kWh/d. The embodied energy
in other packaging chucked away by the average Brit is 4 kWh/d.

![](figure107.png)

Figure 15.4. She’s making chips. Photo: ABB. Making one personal
computer every two years costs 2.5 kWh per day.

![](figure104.png)

Freight transport is measured in ton-kilometres (t-km). If one ton of
Cornish pasties are transported 580 km (figure 15.5) then we say 580
t-km of freight transport have been achieved. The energy intensity of
road trans- port in the UK is about 1 kWh per t-km.

When the container ship in figure 15.6 transports 50 000 tons of cargo a
distance of 10 000 km, it achieves 500 million t-km of freight
transport. The energy intensity of freight transport by this container
ship is 0.015 kWh per t-km. Notice how much more efficient transport by
container-ship is than transport by road. These energy intensities are
displayed in figure 15.8.

### Transport of stuff by road

In 2006, the total amount of road transport in Britain by heavy goods
vehi- cles was 156 billion t-km. Shared between 60 million, that comes
to 7 t-km per day per person, which costs 7 kWh per day per person
(assuming an energy intensity of 1 kWh per ton-km). One quarter of this
transport, by the way, was of food, drink, and tobacco.

### Transport by water

In 2002, 560 million tons of freight passed through British ports. The
Tyn- dall Centre calculated that Britain’s share of the energy cost of
international shipping is 4 kWh/d per person.

### Transport of water; taking the pee

Water’s not a very glamorous stuff, but we use a lot of it – about 160
litres

Figure 15.5. Food-miles – Pasties, hand-made in Helston, Cornwall,
shipped 580 km for consumption in Cambridge.

![](figure111.png)

Figure 15.6. The container ship *Ever Uberty* at Thamesport Container
Terminal. Photo by Ian Boyle www.simplonpc.co.uk.

![](figure112.png)

Figure 15.7. The lorry delivereth and the lorry taketh away. Energy cost
of UK road freight: 7 kWh/d per person.

![](figure340.png)

![](figure109.png)

per day per person. In turn, we provide about 160 litres per day per
person of sewage to the water companies. The cost of pumping water
around the country and treating our sewage is about 0.4 kWh per day per
person.

### Desalination

At the moment the UK doesn’t spend energy on water desalination. But
there’s talk of creating desalination plants in London. What’s the
energy cost of turning salt water into drinking water? The least
energy-intensive method is reverse osmosis. Take a membrane that lets
through only water, put salt water on one side of it, and pressurize the
salt water. Water reluctantly oozes through the membrane, producing
purer water – reluc- tantly, because pure water separated from salt has
low entropy, and nature prefers high entropy states where everything is
mixed up. We must pay high-grade energy to achieve unmixing.

The Island of Jersey has a desalination plant that can produce 6000 m^3^
of pure water per day (figure 15.10). Including the pumps for bringing
the water up from the sea and through a series of filters, the whole
plant uses a power of 2 MW. That’s an energy cost of 8 kWh per m^3^ of
water produced. At a cost of 8 kWh per m^3^, a daily water consumption
of 160 litres would require 1.3 kWh per day.

Figure 15.8. Energy requirements of different forms of
freight-transport. The vertical coordinate shows the energy consumed in
kWh per net ton-km, (that is, the energy per t-km of freight moved, not
including the weight of the vehicle). See also figure 20.23 (energy
requirements of passenger transport).

![](figure108.png)

Water transport requires energy because boats make waves. Nevertheless,
transporting freight by ship is surprisingly energy efficient.

![](figure113.png)

Figure 15.9. Water delivery: 0.3 kWh/d; sewage processing: 0.1 kWh/d.

![](figure110.png)

Stuff retail
------------

Supermarkets in the UK consume about 11 TWh of energy per year. Shared
out equally between 60 million happy shoppers, that’s a power of 0.5 kWh
per day per person.

The significance of imported stuff
----------------------------------

In standard accounts of “Britain’s energy consumption” or “Britain’s
carbon footprint,” imported goods are *not* counted. Britain used to
make its own gizmos, and our per-capita footprint in 1910 was as big as
America’s is today. Now Britain doesn’t manufacture so much (so our
energy consumption and carbon emissions have dropped a bit), but we
still love gizmos, and we get them made for us by other countries.
Should we ignore the energy cost of making the gizmo, because it’s
imported? I don’t think so. Dieter Helm and his colleagues in Oxford
estimate that under a correct account, allowing for imports and exports,
Britain’s carbon foot- print is nearly *doubled* from the official “11
tons CO~2~e per person” to about 21 tons. This implies that the biggest
item in the average British person’s energy footprint is the energy cost
of making imported stuff.

In Chapter H, I explore this idea further, by looking at the weight of
Britain’s imports. Leaving aside our imports of fuels, we import a
little

Figure 15.10. Part of the reverse-osmosis facility at Jersey Water’s
desalination plant. The pump in the foreground, right, has a power of
355 kW and shoves seawater at a pressure of 65 bar into 39 spiral-wound
membranes in the banks of blue horizontal tubes, left, delivering 1500
m^3^ per day of clean water. The clean water from this facility has a
total energy cost of 8 kWh per m^3^.

![](figure341.png)

over 2 tons per person of stuff every year, of which about 1.3 tons per
per- son are processed and manufactured stuff like vehicles, machinery,
white goods, and electrical and electronic equipment. That’s about 4 kg
per day per person of processed stuff. Such goods are mainly made of
materials whose production required at least 10 kWh of energy per kg of
stuff. I thus estimate that this pile of cars, fridges, microwaves,
computers, photo- copiers and televisions has an embodied energy of at
least 40 kWh per day per person.

To summarize all these forms of stuff and stuff-transport, I will put on
the consumption stack 48 kWh per day per person for the making of stuff
(made up of at least 40 for imports, 2 for a daily newspaper, 2 for
road- making, 1 for house-making, and 3 for packaging); and another 12
kWh per day per person for the transport of the stuff by sea, by road,
and by pipe, and the storing of food in supermarkets.

> Work till you shop.
>
> Traditional saying

Notes and further reading
-------------------------

page no.

89*One aluminium drinks can costs 0.6 kWh*. The mass of one can is 15 g.
Esti- mates of the total energy cost of aluminium manufacture vary from
60 MJ/kg to 300 MJ/kg. [yx7zm4], [r22oz], [yhrest]. The figure I used is
from The Alu- minum Association [y5as53]: 150 MJ per kg of aluminium (40
kWh/kg).

–*The embodied energy of a water bottle made of PET*. Source: Hammond
and Jones (2006) – PET’s embodied energy is 30 kWh per kg.

–*The average Brit throws away 400 g of packaging per day*. In 1995,
Britain used 137 kg of packaging per person (Hird et al., 1999).

–*A personal computer costs 1800 kWh of energy*. Manufacture of a PC
requires (in energy and raw materials) the equivalent of about 11 times
its own weight of fossil fuels. Fridges require 1–2 times their weight.
Cars require 1–2 times their weight. Williams (2004); Kuehr (2003).

–*...a rechargeable nickel-cadmium battery*. Source: Rydh and
Karlström(2002).

–*...steel...* From Swedish Steel, “The consumption of coal and coke is
700 kg per ton of finished steel, equal to approximately 5320 kWh per
ton of finished steel. The consumption of oil, LPG and electrical power
is 710 kWh per ton finished product. Total [primary] energy consumption
is thus approx. 6000 kWh per ton finished steel.” (6 kWh per kg.)
[y2ktgg]

90*A new car’s embodied energy is 76 000 kWh*. Source: Treloar et al.
(2004). Burnham et al. (2007) give a lower figure: 30 500 kWh for the
net life-cycle energy cost of a car. One reason for the difference may
be that the latter life- cycle analysis assumes the vehicle is recycled,
thus reducing the net materials cost.

![](figure114.png)

Figure 15.11. Making our stuff costs at least 48 kWh/d. Delivering the
stuff costs 12 kWh/d.

90*Paper has an embodied energy of 10 kWh per kg*. Making newspaper from
virgin wood has an energy cost of about 5 kWh/kg, and the paper itself
has an energy content similar to that of wood, about 5 kWh/kg. (Source:
Ucuncu (1993); Erdincler and Vesilind (1993); see p284.) Energy costs
vary between mills and between countries. 5 kWh/kg is the figure for a
Swedish newspaper mill in 1973 from Norrström (1980), who estimated that
efficiency measures could reduce the cost to about 3.2 kWh/kg. A more
recent full life-cycle analysis (Denison, 1997) estimates the net energy
cost of production of newsprint in the USA from virgin wood followed by
a typical mix of landfilling and incineration to be 12 kWh/kg; the
energy cost of producing newsprint from recycled material and recycling
it is 6 kWh/kg.

91*The energy intensity of road transport in the UK is about 1 kWh per
t-km*. Source: www.dft.gov.uk/pgr/statistics/
datatablespublications/energyenvironment.

–*The energy intensity of freight transport by this container ship is
0.015 kWh per ton-km*. The *Ever Uberty* – length 285 m, breadth 40 m –
has a capacity of 4948 TEUs, deadweight 63 000 t, and a service speed of
25 knots; its engine’s normal delivered power is 44 MW. One TEU is the
size of a small 20-foot container – about 40 m^3^. Most containers you
see today are 40-foot containers with a size of 2 TEU. A 40-foot
container weighs 4 tons and can carry 26 tons of stuff. Assuming its
engine is 50%-efficient, this ship’s energy consumption works out to
0.015 kWh of chemical energy per ton-km.
www.mhi.co.jp/en/products/detail/container\_ship\_ever\_uberty.html

–*Britain’s share of international shipping...* Source: Anderson et al.
(2006).

92*Figure 15.8*. **Energy consumptions of ships**. The five points in
the figure are a container ship (46 km/h), a dry cargo vessel (24 km/h),
an oil tanker (29 km/h), an inland marine ship (24 km/h), and the NS
Savannah (39 km/h).

**Dry cargo vessel** 0.08 kWh/t-km. A vessel with a grain capacity of
5200 m^3^ carries 3360 deadweight tons. (Dead- weight tonnage is the
mass of cargo that the ship can carry.) It travels at speed 13 kn (24
km/h); its one engine with 2 MW delivered power consumes 186 g of
fuel-oil per kWh of delivered energy (42% efficiency).
conoship.com/uk/vessels/detailed/page7.htm

**Oil tanker** A modern oil tanker uses 0.017 kWh/t-km [6lbrab]. Cargo
weight 40 000 t. Capacity: 47 000 m^3^. Main engine: 11.2 MW maximum
delivered power. Speed at 8.2 MW: 15.5 kn (29 km/h). The energy
contained in the oil cargo is 520 million kWh. So 1% of the energy in
the oil is used in transporting the oil one-quarter of the way round the
earth (10 000 km).

**Roll-on, roll-off carriers** The ships of Wilh. Wilhelmsen shipping
company deliver freight-transport with an energy cost between 0.028 and
0.05 kWh/t-km [5ctx4k].

92*Water delivery and sewage treatment costs 0.4 kWh/d per person*. The
total energy use of the water industry in 2005–6 was 7703 GWh. Supplying
1 m^3^ of water has an energy cost of 0.59 kWh. Treating 1 m^3^ of
sewage has an energy cost of 0.63 kWh. For anyone interested in
greenhouse-gas emissions, water supply has a footprint of 289 g CO~2~
per m^3^ of water delivered, and wastewater treatment, 406 g CO~2~ per
m^3^ of wastewater. Domestic water consumption is 151 litres per day per
person. Total water consumption is 221 l/d per person. Leakage amounts
to 57 litres per day per person. Sources: Parliamentary Office of
Science and Technology [www.parliament.
uk/documents/upload/postpn282.pdf], Water UK (2006).

93*Supermarkets in the UK consume 11 TWh/y*. [yqbzl3]

–*Helm et al. suggest that, allowing for imports and exports, Britain’s
carbon footprint is nearly **doubled** to about 21 tons*. Helm et al.
(2007).

![](figure342.png)

16   Geothermal {.green}
===============

Geothermal energy comes from two sources: from radioactive decay in the
crust of the earth, and from heat trickling through the mantle from the
earth’s core. The heat in the core is there because the earth used to be
red-hot, and it’s still cooling down and solidifying; the heat in the
core is also being topped up by tidal friction: the earth flexes in
response to the gravitational fields of the moon and sun, in the same
way that an orange changes shape if you squeeze it and roll it between
your hands.

Geothermal is an attractive renewable because it is “always on,” inde-
pendent of the weather; if we make geothermal power stations, we can
switch them on and off so as to follow demand.

But how much geothermal power is available? We could estimate geothermal
power of two types: the power available at an ordinary location on the
earth’s crust; and the power available in special hot spots like Iceland
(figure 16.3). While the right place to first develop geothermal
technology is definitely the special hot spots, I’m going to assume that
the greater total resource comes from the ordinary locations, since
ordinary locations are so much more numerous.

The difficulty with making *sustainable* geothermal power is that the
speed at which heat travels through solid rock limits the rate at which
heat can be sustainably sucked out of the red-hot interior of the earth.
It’s like trying to drink a crushed-ice drink through a straw. You stick
in the straw, and suck, and you get a nice mouthful of cold liquid. But
after a little more sucking, you find you’re sucking air. You’ve
extracted all the liquid from the ice around the tip of the straw. Your
initial rate of sucking wasn’t sustainable.

If you stick a straw down a 15-km hole in the earth, you’ll find it’s
nice and hot there, easily hot enough to boil water. So, you could stick
two straws down, and pump cold water down one straw and suck from the
other. You’ll be sucking up steam, and you can run a power station.
Limit- less power? No. After a while, your sucking of heat out of the
rock will have reduced the temperature of the rock. You weren’t sucking
sustainably. You now have a long wait before the rock at the tip of your
straws warms up again. A possible attitude to this problem is to treat
geothermal heat the same way we currently treat fossil fuels: as a
resource to be mined rather than collected sustainably. Living off
geothermal heat in this way might be better for the planet than living
unsustainably off fossil fuels; but perhaps it would only be another
stop-gap giving us another 100 years of unsustainable living? In this
book I’m most interested in *sustainable* energy, as the title hinted.
Let’s do the sums.

![](figure116.png)

Figure 16.1. An earth in section.

![](figure117.png)

Figure 16.2. Some granite.

![](figure115.png)

Geothermal power that would be sustainable forever
--------------------------------------------------

First imagine using geothermal energy sustainably by sticking down
straws to an appropriate depth, and sucking *gently*. Sucking at such a
rate that the rocks at the end of the our straws don’t get colder and
colder. This means sucking at the natural rate at which heat is already
flowing out of the earth.

As I said before, geothermal energy comes from two sources: from
radioactive decay in the crust of the earth, and from heat trickling
through the mantle from the earth’s core. In a typical continent, the
heat flow from the centre coming through the mantle is about 10 mW/m^2^.
The heat flow at the surface is 50 mW/m^2^. So the radioactive decay has
added an extra 40 mW/m^2^ to the heat flow from the centre.

So at a typical location, the maximum power we can get per unit area is
50 mW/m^2^. But that power is not high-grade power, it’s low-grade heat
that’s trickling through at the ambient temperature up here. We presum-
ably want to make electricity, and that’s why we must drill down. Heat
is useful only if it comes from a source at a higher temperature than
the ambient temperature. The temperature increases with depth as shown
in figure 16.4, reaching a temperature of about 500 °C at a depth of 40
km. Between depths of 0 km where the heat flow is biggest but the rock
tem- perature is too low, and 40 km, where the rocks are hottest but the
heat flow is 5 times smaller (because we’re missing out on all the heat
generated from radioactive decay) there is an optimal depth at which we
should suck. The exact optimal depth depends on what sort of sucking and
power- station machinery we use. We can bound the maximum sustainable
power

Figure 16.3. Geothermal power in Iceland. Average geothermal electricity
generation in Iceland (population, 300 000) in 2006 was 300 MW (24 kWh/d
per person). More than half of Iceland’s electricity is used for
aluminium production. Photo by Gretar Ívarsson.

one milliwatt (1 mW) is 0.001 W.

![](figure118.png)

Figure 16.4. Temperature profile in a typical continent.

by finding the optimal depth assuming that we have an ideal engine for
turning heat into electricity, and that drilling to any depth is free.

For the temperature profile shown in figure 16.4, I calculated that the
optimal depth is about 15 km. Under these conditions, an ideal heat
engine would deliver 17 mW/m^2^. At the world population density of 43
people per square km, that’s 10 kWh per person per day, if *all* land
area were used. In the UK, the population density is 5 times greater, so
wide-scale geothermal power of this sustainable-forever variety could
offer at most 2 kWh per person per day.

This is the sustainable-forever figure, ignoring hot spots, assuming
per- fect power stations, assuming every square metre of continent is
exploited, and assuming that drilling is free. And that it is possible
to drill 15-km deep holes.

Geothermal power as mining
--------------------------

The other geothermal strategy is to treat the heat as a resource to be
mined. In “enhanced geothermal extraction” from hot dry rocks (figure
16.5), we first drill down to a depth of 5 or 10 km, and fracture the
rocks by pumping in water. (This step may create earthquakes, which
don’t go down well with the locals.) Then we drill a second well into
the fracture zone. Then we pump water down one well and extract
superheated water or steam from the other. This steam can be used to
make electricity or to deliver heat. What’s the hot dry rock resource of
the UK? Sadly, Britain is not well endowed. Most of the hot rocks are
concentrated in Cornwall, where some geothermal experiments were carried
out in 1985 in a research facility at Rosemanowes, now closed.
Consultants assessing these experiments con- cluded that “generation of
electrical power from hot dry rock was unlikely to be technically or
commercially viable in Cornwall, or elsewhere in the UK, in the short or
medium term.” Nonetheless, what is the resource? The biggest estimate of
the hot dry rock resource in the UK is a total energy of 130 000 TWh,
which, according to the consultants, could conceivably con- tribute 1.1
kWh per day per person of electricity for about 800 years.

Other places in the world have more promising hot dry rocks, so if you
want to know the geothermal answers for other countries, be sure to ask
a local. But sadly for Britain, geothermal will only ever play a tiny
part.

#### Doesn’t Southampton use geothermal energy already? How much does that deliver?

Yes, Southampton Geothermal District Heating Scheme was, in 2004 at
least, the only geothermal heating scheme in the UK. It provides the
city with a supply of hot water. The geothermal well is part of a
combined heat, power, and cooling system that delivers hot and chilled
water to customers, and sells electricity to the grid. Geothermal energy
contributes about 15% of the 70 GWh of heat per year delivered by this
system. The population

![](figure119.png)

Figure 16.5. Enhanced geothermal extraction from hot dry rock. One well
is drilled and pressurized to create fractures. A second well is drilled
into the far side of the fracture zone. Then cold water is pumped down
one well and heated water (indeed, steam) is sucked up the other.

![](figure343.png)

of Southampton at the last census was 217 445, so the geothermal power
being delivered there is **0.13kWh/d per person** in Southampton.

Notes and further reading
-------------------------

page no.

97*The heat flow at the surface is 50 mW/m^2^*. Massachusetts Institute
of Technology (2006) says 59 mW/m^2^ average, with a range, in the USA,
from 25 mW to 150 mW. Shepherd (2003) gives 63 mW/m^2^.

98*“Generation of electrical power from hot dry rock was unlikely to be
technically or commercially viable in the UK”*. Source: MacDonald et al.
(1992). See also Richards et al. (1994).

–*The biggest estimate of the hot dry rock resource in the UK ... could
conceivably contribute 1.1 kWh per day per person of electricity for
about 800 years*. Source: MacDonald et al. (1992).

–*Other places in the world have more promising hot dry rocks*. There’s
a good study (Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2006) describing
the USA’s hot dry rock resource. Another more speculative approach,
researched by Sandia National Laboratories in the 1970s, is to drill all
the way down to magma at temperatures of 600–1300 °C, perhaps 15 km
deep, and get power there. The website www.magma-power.com reckons that
the heat in pools of magma under the US would cover US energy
consumption for 500 or 5000 years, and that it could be extracted
economically.

–*Southampton Geothermal District Heating Scheme*.
www.southampton.gov.uk.

![](figure120.png)

Figure 16.6. Geothermal.

17   Public services {.red}
====================

> Every gun that is made, every warship launched, every rocket fired
> signifies, in the final sense, a theft from those who hunger and are
> not fed, those who are cold and are not clothed.
>
> This world in arms is not spending money alone. It is spending the
> sweat of its laborers, the genius of its scientists, the hopes of its
> children.
>
> President Dwight D. Eisenhower – April, 1953

The energy cost of “defence”
----------------------------

Let’s try to estimate how much energy we spend on our military.

In 2007–8, the fraction of British central government expenditure that
went to defence was £33 billion/£587 billion = 6%. If we include the
UK’s spending on counter-terrorism and intelligence (£2.5 billion per
year and rising), the total for defensive activities comes to £36
billion.

As a crude estimate we might guess that 6% of this £36 billion is spent
on energy at a cost of 2.7p per kWh. (6% is the fraction of GDP that is
spent on energy, and 2.7p is the average price of energy.) That works
out to about 80 TWh per year of energy going into defence: making
bullets, bombs, nuc- lear weapons; making devices for delivering
bullets, bombs, and nuclear weapons; and roaring around keeping in trim
for the next game of good- against-evil. In our favourite units, this
corresponds to 4 kWh per day per person.

The cost of nuclear defence
---------------------------

The financial expenditure by the USA on manufacturing and deploying
nuclear weapons from 1945 to 1996 was \$5.5 trillion (in 1996 dollars).

Nuclear-weapons spending over this period exceeded the combined to- tal
federal spending for education; agriculture; training, employment, and
social services; natural resources and the environment; general science,
space, and technology; community and regional development (including
disaster relief); law enforcement; and energy production and regulation.

If again we assume that 6% of this expenditure went to energy at a cost
of 5¢ per kWh, we find that the energy cost of having nuclear weapons
was 26 000 kWh per American, or 1.4 kWh per day per American (shared
among 250 million Americans over 51 years).

What energy would have been delivered to the lucky recipients, had all
those nuclear weapons been used? The energies of the biggest thermonu-
clear weapons developed by the USA and USSR are measured in megatons of
TNT. A ton of TNT is 1200 kWh. The bomb that destroyed Hiroshima

![](figure121.png)

![](figure122.png)

had the energy of 15 000 tons of TNT (18 million kWh). A *megaton* bomb
delivers an energy of 1.2 billion kWh. If dropped on a city of one
million, a megaton bomb makes an energy donation of 1200 kWh per person,
equivalent to 120 litres of petrol per person. The total energy of the
USA’s nuclear arsenal today is 2400 megatons, contained in 10 000
warheads. In the good old days when folks really took defence seriously,
the arsenal’s energy was 20 000 megatons. These bombs, if used, would
have delivered an energy of about 100 000 kWh per American. That’s
equivalent to 7 kWh per day per person for a duration of 40 years –
similar to all the electrical energy supplied to America by nuclear
power.

### Energy cost of making nuclear materials for bombs

The main nuclear materials are plutonium, of which the USA has produced
104 t, and high-enriched uranium (HEU), of which the USA has produced
994 t. Manufacturing these materials requires energy.

The most efficient plutonium-production facilities use 24 000 kWh of
heat when producing 1 gram of plutonium. So the direct energy-cost of
making the USA’s 104 tons of plutonium (1945–1996) was at least 2.5
tril- lion kWh which is 0.5 kWh per day per person (if shared between
250 million Americans).

The main energy-cost in manufacturing HEU is the cost of enrichment.
Work is required to separate the ^235^U and ^238^U atoms in natural
uranium in order to create a final product that is richer in ^235^U. The
USA’s production of 994 tons of highly-enriched uranium (the USA’s
total, 1945–1996) had an energy cost of about 0.1 kWh per day per
person.

> “Trident creates jobs.” Well, so does relining our schools with
> asbestos,but that doesn’t mean we should do it!
>
> Marcus Brigstocke

Universities
------------

According to Times Higher Education Supplement (30 March 2007), UK
universities use 5.2 billion kWh per year. Shared out among the whole
population, that’s a power of 0.24 kWh per day per person.

So higher education and research seem to have a much lower energy cost
than defensive war-gaming.

There may be other energy-consuming public services we could talk about,
but at this point I’d like to wrap up our race between the red and green
stacks.

![](figure123.png)

Figure 17.1. The energy cost of defence in the UK is estimated to be
about 4 kWh per day per person.

Notes and further reading
-------------------------

page no.

100*military energy budget*. The UK budget can be found at [yttg7p];
defence gets £33.4 billion [fcqfw] and intelligence and
counter-terrorism £2.5 billion per year [2e4fcs]. According to p14 of
the Government’s Expenditure Plans 2007/08 [33x5kc], the “total resource
budget” of the Department of Defence is a bigger sum, £39 billion, of
which £33.5 billion goes for “provision of defence capability” and £6
billion for armed forces pay and pensions and war pensions. A breakdown
of this budget can be found here: [35ab2c]. See also [yg5fsj], [yfgjna],
and www.conscienceonline.org.uk. The US military’s energy consumption is
published: “The Department of Defense is the largest single consumer of
energy in the United States. In 2006, it spent \$13.6 billion to buy 110
million barrels of petroleum fuel [roughly 190 billion kWh] and 3.8
billion kWh of electricity” (Dept. of Defense, 2008). This figure
describes the direct use of fuel and electricity and doesn’t include the
embodied energy in the military’s toys. Dividing by the US population of
300 million, it comes to 1.7 kWh/d per person.

–*The financial expenditure by the USA on manufacturing and deploying
nuclear weapons from 1945 to 1996 was \$5.5 trillion (in 1996 dollars)*.
Source: Schwartz (1998).

101*Energy cost of plutonium production*. [slbae].

–*The USA’s production of 994 tons of HEU...* Material enriched to
between 4% and 5% ^235^U is called low-enriched uranium (LEU).
90%-enriched ura- nium is called high-enriched uranium (HEU). It takes
three times as much work to enrich uranium from its natural state to 5%
LEU as it does to enrich LEU to 90% HEU. The nuclear power industry
measures these energy requirements in a unit called the separative work
unit (SWU). To produce a kilogram of ^235^U as HEU takes 232 SWU. To
make 1 kg of ^235^U as LEU (in 22.7 kg of LEU) takes about 151 SWU. In
both cases one starts from natural uranium (0.71% 235U) and discards
depleted uranium containing 0.25% ^235^U. The commercial nuclear fuel
market values an SWU at about \$100. It takes about 100 000 SWU of
enriched uranium to fuel a typical 1000 MW commer- cial nuclear reactor
for a year. Two uranium enrichment methods are cur- rently in commercial
use: gaseous diffusion and gas centrifuge. The gaseous diffusion process
consumes about 2500 kWh per SWU, while modern gas centrifuge plants
require only about 50 kWh per SWU. [yh45h8], [t2948], [2ywzee]. A modern
centrifuge produces about 3 SWU per year. The USA’s production of 994
tons of highly-enriched uranium (the USA’s total, 1945–1996) cost 230
million SWU, which works out to 0.1 kWh/d per person (assuming 250
million Americans, and using 2500 kWh/SWU as the cost of diffusion
enrichment).

![](figure124.png)

![](figure344.png)

18   Can we live on renewables? {.darkblue}
===============================

The red stack in figure 18.1 adds up to 195 kWh per day per person. The
green stack adds up to about 180 kWh/d/p. A close race! But please
remember: in calculating our production stack we threw all economic,
social, and environmental constraints to the wind. Also, some of our
green contributors are probably incompatible with each other: our
photovoltaic panels and hot-water panels would clash with each other on
roofs; and our solar photovoltaic farms using 5% of the country might
compete with the energy crops with which we covered 75% of the country.
If we were to lose just one of our bigger green contributors – for
example, if we decided that deep offshore wind is not an option, or that
panelling 5% of the country with photovoltaics at a cost of £200 000 per
person is not on – then the production stack would no longer match the
consumption stack.

Furthermore, even if our red consumption stack were lower than our green
production stack, it would not necessarily mean our energy sums are
adding up. You can’t power a TV with cat food, nor can you feed a cat
from a wind turbine. Energy exists in different forms – chemical,
electrical, kinetic, and heat, for example. For a sustainable energy
plan to add up, we need both the forms and amounts of energy consumption
and production to match up. Converting energy from one form to another –
from chemical to electrical, as at a fossil-fuel power station, or from
electrical to chemical, as in a factory making hydrogen from water –
usually involves substantial losses of useful energy. We will come back
to this important detail in Chapter 27, which will describe some energy
plans that do add up.

Here we’ll reflect on our estimates of consumption and production,
compare them with official averages and with other people’s estimates,
and discuss how much power renewables could plausibly deliver in a
country like Britain.

The questions we’ll address in this chapter are:

1.  Is the size of the red stack roughly correct? What is the *average*
    con- sumption of Britain? We’ll look at the official
    energy-consumption numbers for Britain and a few other countries.
2.  Have I been unfair to renewables, underestimating their potential?
    We’ll compare the estimates in the green stack with estimates pub-
    lished by organizations such as the Sustainable Development Com-
    mission, the Institution of Electrical Engineers, and the Centre for
    Alternative Technology.
3.  What happens to the green stack when we take into account social and
    economic constraints?

![](figure125.png)

Figure 18.1. The state of play after we added up all the traditional
renewables.

Red reflections
---------------

Our estimate of a typical affluent person’s consumption (figure 18.1)
has reached 195 kWh per day. It is indeed true that many people use this
much energy, and that many more aspire to such levels of consumption.
The *average* American consumes about 250 kWh per day. If we all raised
our standard of consumption to an average American level, the green pro-
duction stack would definitely be dwarfed by the red consumption stack.

What about the average European and the average Brit? Average Eu- ropean
consumption of “primary energy” (which means the energy con- tained in
raw fuels, plus wind and hydroelectricity) is about 125 kWh per day per
person. The UK average is also 125 kWh per day per person.

These official averages do not include two energy flows. First, the “em-
bedded energy” in *imported* stuff (the energy expended in making the
stuff) is not included at all. We estimated in Chapter 15 that the
embedded energy in imported stuff is at least 40 kWh/d per person.
Second, the official estimates of “primary energy consumption” include
only industrial energy flows – things like fossil fuels and
hydroelectricity – and don’t keep track of the natural embedded energy
in food: energy that was originally harnessed by photosynthesis.

Another difference between the red stack we slapped together and the
national total is that in most of the consumption chapters so far we
tended to ignore the energy lost in converting energy from one form to
another, and in transporting energy around. For example, the “car”
estimate in Part I covered only the energy in the petrol, not the energy
used at the oil refinery that makes the petrol, nor the energy used in
trundling the oil and petrol from A to B. The national total accounts
for all the energy, before any conversion losses. Conversion losses in
fact account for about 22% of total national energy consumption. Most of
these conversion losses happen at power stations. Losses in the
electricity transmission network chuck away 1% of total national energy
consumption.

When building our red stack, we tried to imagine how much energy a
typical affluent person uses. Has this approach biased our perception of
the importance of different activities? Let’s look at some official
numbers. Figure 18.2 shows the breakdown of energy consumption by end
use. The top two categories are transport and heating (hot air and hot
water). Those two categories also dominated the red stack in Part I.
Good.

Road transport

Petroleum

22.5

Railways

Petroleum

0.4

Water transport

Petroleum

1.0

Aviation

Petroleum

7.4

All modes

Electricity

0.4

All energy used by transport

31.6

![](figure129.png)

Figure 18.2. Energy consumption, broken down by end use, according to
the Department for Trade and Industry.

Table 18.3. 2006 breakdown of energy consumption by transport mode, in
kWh/d per person. Source: Dept. for Transport (2007).

![](figure126.png)

Let’s look more closely at transport. In our red stack, we found that
the energy footprints of driving a car 50 km per day and of flying to
Cape Town once per year are roughly equal. Table 18.3 shows the relative
im- portances of the different transport modes in the national
balance-sheet. In the national averages, aviation is smaller than road
transport.

How do Britain’s official consumption figures compare with those of
other countries? Figure 18.4 shows the power consumptions of lots of
countries or regions, versus their gross domestic products (GDPs).
There’s an evident correlation between power consumption and GDP: the
higher a country’s GDP (per capita), the more power it consumes per
capita. The UK is a fairly typical high-GDP country, surrounded by
Germany, France, Japan, Austria, Ireland, Switzerland, and Denmark. The
only notable ex- ception to the rule “big GDP implies big power
consumption” is Hong Kong. Hong Kong’s GDP per capita is about the same
as Britain’s, but

Figure 18.4. Power consumption per capita, versus GDP per capita, in
purchasing-power-parity US dollars. Squares show countries having “high
human development;” circles, “medium” or “low.” Figure 30.1 (p231) shows
the same data on logarithmic scales.

![](figure127.png)

Hong Kong’s power consumption is about 80 kWh/d/p.

The message I take from these country comparisons is that the UK is a
fairly typical European country, and therefore provides a good case
study for asking the question “How can a country with a high quality of
life get its energy sustainably?”

Green reflections
-----------------

People often say that Britain has plenty of renewables. Have I been mean
to green? Are my numbers a load of rubbish? Have I underestimated sus-
tainable production? Let’s compare my green numbers first with several
estimates found in the Sustainable Development Commission’s publication
*The role of nuclear power in a low carbon economy. Reducing CO~2~
emissions – nuclear and the alternatives*. Remarkably, even though the
Sustainable Development Commission’s take on sustainable resources is
very positive (“We have huge tidal, wave, biomass and solar resources”),
*all the estimates in the Sustainable Development Commission’s document
are smaller than mine!* (To be precise, all the estimates of the
renewables total are smaller thanmy total.) The Sustainable Development
Commission’s publication givesestimates from four sources detailed below
(IEE, Tyndall, IAG, and PIU). Figure 18.6 shows my estimates alongside
numbers from these four sources and numbers from the Centre for
Alternative Technology (CAT). Here’s a description of each source.

IEEThe Institute of Electrical Engineers published a report on renewable
energy in 2002 – a summary of possible contributions from renew- ables
in the UK. The second column of figure 18.6 shows the “technical
potential” of a variety of renewable technologies for UK electricity
generation – “an upper limit that is unlikely ever to be exceeded even
with quite dramatic changes in the structure of our society and
economy.” According to the IEE, the total of all renewables’ technical
potential is about 27 kWh/d per person.

Figure 18.5. Hong Kong. Photo by Samuel Louie and Carol Spears.

**Tyndall**   The Tyndall Centre’s estimate of the total practicable
renewable- energy resource is 15 kWh per day per person.

IAGThe Interdepartmental Analysts Group’s estimates of renewables, take
into account economic constraints. Their total practical *and* eco-
nomical resource (at a retail price of 7p/kWh) is 12 kWh per day per
person.

PIUThe “PIU” column shows the “indicative resource potential for renew-
able electricity generation options” from the DTI’s contribution to the
PIU review in 2001. For each technology I show their “practical
maximum,” or, if no practical maximum was given, their “theoretical
maximum.”

CATThe final column shows the numbers from the Centre for Alternative
Technology’s “Island Britain” plan Helweg-Larsen and Bull (2007).

### Bio-powered Europe

Sometimes people ask me “surely we used to live on renewables just fine,
before the Industrial Revolution?” Yes, but don’t forget that two things
were different then: lifestyles, and population densities.

Turning the clock back more than 400 years, Europe lived almost en-
tirely on sustainable sources: mainly wood and crops, augmented by a
little wind power, tidal power, and water power. It’s been estimated
that the average person’s lifestyle consumed a power of 20 kWh per day.
The wood used per person was 4 kg per day, which required 1 hectare (10
000 m^2^) of forest per person. The area of land per person in Europe in
the 1700s was 52 000 m^2^. In the regions with highest population
density, the area per per- son was 17 500 m^2^ of arable land, pastures,
and woods. Today the area of Britain per person is just 4000 m^2^, so
even if we reverted to the lifestyle of the Middle Ages and completely
forested the country, we could no longer live sustainably here. Our
population density is far too high.

Green ambitions meet social reality
-----------------------------------

Figure 18.1 is bleak news. Yes, technically, Britain has “huge”
renewables. But realistically, I don’t think Britain can live on its own
renewables – at least not the way we currently live. I am partly driven
to this conclusion by the chorus of opposition that greets any major
renewable energy proposal. People love renewable energy, *unless it is
bigger than a figleaf*. If the British are good at one thing, it’s
saying “no.”

Wind farms?

“No, they’re ugly noisy things.”

Solar panels on roofs?

“No, they would spoil the visual amenity of the street.”

![](figure131.png)

More forestry?

“No, it ruins the countryside.”

Waste incineration?

“No, I’m worried about health risks, traffic con- gestion, dust and
noise.”

Hydroelectricity?

“Yes, but not big hydro – that harms the environ- ment.”

Offshore wind?

“No, I’m more worried about the ugly powerlines coming ashore than I was
about a Nazi invasion.”

Wave or geothermal power?

“No, far too expensive.”

After all these objections, I fear that the maximum Britain would ever
get from renewables would be something like what’s shown in the bottom
right of figure 18.7.

Figure 18.8 offers guidance to anyone trying to erect wind farms in
Britain. On a map of the British mainland I’ve shown in white a 2-km
radius exclusion zone surrounding every hamlet, village, and town. These
white areas would presumably be excluded from wind-farm development
because they are too close to the humans. I’ve coloured in black all
regions

Figure 18.8. Where the wild things are. One of the grounds for objecting
to wind farms is the noise they produce. I’ve chopped out of this map of
the British mainland a 2-km-radius exclusion zone surrounding every
hamlet, village, and town. These white areas would presumably be
excluded from wind-farm development. The remaining black areas would
perhaps also be largely excluded because of the need to protect tranquil
places from industrialization. Settlement data from
www.openstreetmap.org.

![](figure132.png)

that are *more than 2 km* from any human settlement. These areas are
largely excluded from wind-farm development because they are *tranquil*,
and it’s essential to protect tranquil places from industrialization. If
you want to avoid objections to your wind farm, pick any piece of land
that is not coloured black or white.

> Some of these environmentalists who have good hearts but confused
> minds are almost a barrier to tackling climate change.
>
> Malcolm Wicks, Minister of State for Energy

We are drawing to the close of Part I. The assumption was that we want
to get off fossil fuels, for one or more of the reasons listed in
Chapter 1 – climate change, security of supply, and so forth. Figure
18.9 shows how much power we currently get from renewables and nuclear.
They amount to just 4% of our total power consumption.

The two conclusions we can draw from Part I are:

1.  *To make a difference, renewable facilities have to be
    country-sized*.
2.  For any renewable facility to make a contribution comparable to our
    current consumption, *it has to be country-sized*. To get a big
    contribu- tion from wind, we used wind farms with the area of Wales.
    To get a

Figure 18.9. Production of renewables and nuclear energy in the UK in
2006. All powers are expressed per-person, as usual. The breakdown of
the renewables on the right hand side is scaled up 100-fold vertically.

1.  big contribution from solar photovoltaics, we required half the area
    of Wales. To get a big contribution from waves, we imagined wave
    farms covering 500 km of coastline. To make energy crops with a big
    contribution, we took 75% of the whole country.
2.  Renewable facilities have to be country-sized because all renewables
    are so diffuse. Table 18.10 summarizes most of the powers-per-unit-
    area that we encountered in Part I.
3.  To sustain Britain’s lifestyle on its renewables alone would be very
    difficult. A renewable-based energy solution will necessarily be
    large and intrusive.
4.  2.*It’s not going to be easy* to make a plan that adds up using
    renewables alone. If we are serious about getting off fossil fuels,
    Brits are going to have to learn to start saying “yes” to something.
    Indeed to several somethings.

In Part II I’ll ask, “assuming that we can’t get production from renew-
ables to add up to our current consumption, what are the other options?”

Notes and further reading
-------------------------

page no.

104*UK average energy consumption is 125 kWh per day per person*. I took
this number from the UNDP Human Devel- opment Report, 2007. The DTI (now
known as DBERR) publishes a Digest of United Kingdom Energy Statistics
every year. [uzek2]. In 2006, according to DUKES, total primary energy
demand was 244 million tons of oil equivalent, which corresponds to 130
kWh per day per person. I don’t know the reason for the small difference
between the UNDP number and the DUKES number, but I can explain why I
chose the slightly lower number. As I mentioned on p27, DUKES uses the
same energy-summing convention as me, declaring one kWh of chemical
energy to be equal to one kWh of electricity. But there’s one minor
exception: DUKES defines the “primary energy” produced in nuclear power
stations to be the thermal energy, which in 2006 was 9 kWh/d/p; this was
converted (with 38% efficiency) to 3.4 kWh/d/p of supplied electricity;
in my accounts, I’ve focused on the electricity produced by
hydroelectricity, other renewables, and nuclear power; this small switch
in convention reduces the nuclear contribution by about 5 kWh/d/p.

–*Losses in the electricity transmission network chuck away 1% of total
national energy consumption*. To put it another way, the losses are 8%
of the electricity generated. This 8% loss can be broken down: roughly
1.5% is lost in the long-distance high-voltage system, and 6% in the
local public supply system. Source: MacLeay et al. (2007).

105*Figure 18.4*. Data from UNDP Human Development Report, 2007.
[3av4s9]

108*In the Middle Ages, the average person’s lifestyle consumed a power
of 20 kWh per day*. Source: Malanima (2006).

110*“I’m more worried about the ugly powerlines coming ashore than I was
about a Nazi invasion.”* Source: [6frj55].

Power per unit land or water area

Wind

2 W/m^2^

Offshore wind

3 W/m^2^

Tidal pools

3 W/m^2^

Tidal stream

6 W/m^2^

Solar PV panels

5-20 W/m^2^

Plants

0.5 W/m^2^

Rain-water   (highlands)

0.24 W/m^2^

Hydroelectric   facility

11 W/m^2^

Geothermal

0.017 W/m^2^

Table 18.10. Renewable facilities have to be country-sized because all
renewables are so diffuse.

19   Every BIG helps {.darkblue}
====================

We’ve established that the UK’s present lifestyle can’t be sustained on
the UK’s own renewables (except with the industrialization of
country-sized areas of land and sea). So, what are our options, if we
wish to get off fossil fuels and live sustainably? We can balance the
energy budget either by reducing demand, or by increasing supply, or, of
course, by doing both.

Have no illusions. To achieve our goal of getting off fossil fuels,
these reductions in demand and increases in supply must be *big*. Don’t
be distracted by the myth that “every little helps.” *If everyone does a
little, we’ll achieve only a little*. We must do a lot. What’s required
are *big* changes in demand and in supply.

“But surely, if 60 million people all do a little, it’ll add up to a
lot?” No. This “if-everyone” multiplying machine is just a way of making
something small *sound* big. The “if-everyone” multiplying machine
churns out inspirational statements of the form “if *everyone* did X,
then it would provide enough energy/water/gas to do Y,” where Y sounds
impressive. Is it surprising that Y sounds big? Of course not. We got Y
by multiplying X by the number of people involved – 60 million or so!
Here’s an example from the Conservative Party’s otherwise
straight-talking *Blueprint for a Green Economy*:

> “The mobile phone charger averages around ... 1W consumption, but if
> every one of the country’s 25 million mobile phones chargers were left
> plugged in and switched on they would consume enough electricity
> (219GWh) to power 66 000 homes for one year.”

66 000? Wow, what a lot of homes! Switch off the chargers! 66 000 sounds
a lot, but the sensible thing to compare it with is the total number of
homes that we’re imagining would participate in this feat of
conservation, namely 25 *million* homes. 66 000 is just *one quarter of
one percent* of 25 million. So while the statement quoted above is true,
I think a calmer way to put it is:

> If you leave your mobile phone charger plugged in, it uses one quarter
> of one percent of your home’s electricity.

And if everyone does it?

> If *everyone* leaves their mobile phone charger plugged in, those
> chargers will use one quarter of one percent of their homes’
> electricity.

The “if-everyone” multiplying machine is a bad thing because it deflects
people’s attention towards 25million minnows instead of 25million
sharks. The mantra “*Little changes can make a big difference*” is
bunkum, when applied to climate change and power. It may be true that
“many people doing

![](figure431.png)

Figure 19.1. Reproduced by kind permission of PRIVATE EYE / Robert
Thompson www.private-eye.co.uk.

a little adds up to a lot,” if all those “littles” are somehow focused
into a single “lot” – for example, if one million people donate £10 to
*one* accident- victim, then the victim receives £10 million. That’s a
lot. But power is a very different thing. We all use power. So to
achieve a “big difference” in total power consumption, you need almost
everyone to make a “big” difference to their own power consumption.

So, what’s required are *big* changes in demand and in supply. Demand
for power could be reduced in three ways:

1.  by reducing our population (figure 19.2);
2.  by changing our lifestyle;
3.  by keeping our lifestyle, but reducing its energy intensity through
    “efficiency” and “technology.”

Supply could be increased in three ways:

1.  We could get off fossil fuels by investing in “clean coal”
    technology. Oops! Coal is a fossil fuel. Well, never mind – let’s
    take a look at this idea. If we used coal “sustainably” (a notion
    we’ll define in a moment), how much power could it offer? If we
    don’t care about sustainability and just want “security of supply,”
    could coal offer that?
2.  We could invest in nuclear fission. Is current nuclear technology
    “sustainable”? Is it at least a stop-gap that might last for 100
    years?
3.  We could buy, beg, or steal renewable energy from other countries –
    bearing in mind that most countries will be in the same boat as
    Britain and will have no renewable energy to spare; and also bearing
    in mind that sourcing renewable energy from another country doesn’t
    magically shrink the renewable power facilities required. If we
    import renewable energy from other countries in order to avoid
    building renewable facilities the size of Wales in *our* country,
    someone will have to build facilities roughly the size of Wales in
    those other countries.

The next seven chapters discuss first how to reduce demand
substantially, and second how to increase supply to meet that reduced,
but still “huge,” demand. In these chapters, I won’t mention *all* the
good ideas. I’ll discuss just the *big* ideas.

Cartoon Britain
---------------

To simplify and streamline our discussion of demand reduction, I propose
to work with a cartoon of British energy consumption, omitting lots of
details in order to focus on the big picture. My cartoon-Britain
consumes

*While the footprint of each individual cannot be reduced to zero, the
absence of an individual does do so.*

Chris Rapley, former Director of the British Antarctic Survey

*We need fewer people, not greener ones.*

Daily Telegraph, 24 July 2007

*Democracy cannot survive overpopulation. Human dignity cannot survive
overpopulation.*

Isaac Asimov

![](figure432.png)

Figure 19.2. Population growth and emissions... Cartoon courtesy of
Colin Wheeler.

energy in just three forms: heating, transport, and electricity. The
heating consumption of cartoon-Britain is 40 kWh per day per person
(currently all supplied by fossil fuels); the transport consumption is
also 40 kWh per day per person (currently all supplied by fossil fuels);
and the electricity consumption is 18 kWh(e) per day per person; the
electricity is currently al- most all generated from fossil fuels; the
conversion of fossil-fuel energy to electricity is 40% efficient, so
supplying 18 kWh(e) of electricity in today’s cartoon-Britain requires a
fossil-fuel input of 45 kWh per day per person. This simplification
ignores some fairly sizeable details, such as agriculture and industry,
and the embodied energy of imported goods! But I’d like to be able to
have a *quick* conversation about the main things we need to do to get
off fossil fuels. Heating, transport, and electricity account for more
than half of our energy consumption, so if we can come up with a plan
that delivers heating, transport, and electricity sustainably, then we
have made a good step on the way to a more detailed plan that adds up.

Having adopted this cartoon of Britain, our discussions of demand re-
duction will have just three bits. First, how can we reduce transport’s
energy-demand and eliminate all fossil fuel use for transport? This is
the topic of Chapter 20. Second, how can we reduce heating’s
energy-demand and eliminate all fossil fuel use for heating? This is the
topic of Chapter 21. Third, what about electricity? Chapter 22 discusses
efficiency in electricity consumption.

Three supply options – clean coal, nuclear, and other people’s
renewables – are then discussed in Chapters 23, 24, and 25. Finally,
Chapter 26 discusses how to cope with fluctuations in demand and
fluctuations in renewable power production.

Having laid out the demand-reducing and supply-increasing options,
Chapters 27 and 28 discuss various ways to put these options together to
make plans that add up, in order to supply cartoon-Britain’s transport,
heating, and electricity.

I could spend many pages discussing “50 things you can do to make a
difference,” but I think this cartoon approach, chasing the three
biggest fish, should lead to more effective policies.

But what about “stuff”? According to Part I, the embodied energy in
imported stuff might be the biggest fish of all! Yes, perhaps that fish
is the mammoth in the room. But let’s leave defossilizing that mammoth
to one side, and focus on the animals over which we have direct control.

So, here we go: let’s talk about transport, heating, and electricity.

For the impatient reader
------------------------

Are you eager to know the end of the story right away? Here is a quick
summary, a sneak preview of Part II.

First, we electrify transport. Electrification both gets transport off
fossil fuels, and makes transport more energy-efficient. (Of course,
electrification

![](figure133.png)

Figure 19.3. Current consumption in “cartoon-Britain 2008.”

increases our demand for green electricity.)

Second, to supplement solar-thermal heating, we electrify most heating
of air and water in buildings using *heat pumps*, which are four times
more efficient than ordinary electrical heaters. This electrification of
heating further increases the amount of green electricity required.

Third, we get all the green electricity from a mix of four sources: from
our own renewables; perhaps from “clean coal;” perhaps from nuclear; and
finally, and with great politeness, from other countries’ renewables.

Among other countries’ renewables, solar power in deserts is the most
plentiful option. As long as we can build peaceful international
collabor- ations, solar power in other people’s deserts certainly has
the technical potential to provide us, them, and everyone with 125 kWh
per day per person.

Questions? Read on.

20   Better transport {.darkblue}
=====================

> Modern vehicle technology can reduce climate change emissions without
> changing the look, feel or performance that owners have come to
> expect.
>
> California Air Resources Board

Roughly one third of our energy goes into transportation. Can
*technology* deliver a reduction in consumption? In this chapter we
explore options for achieving two goals: to deliver the biggest possible
reduction in transport’s energy use, *and* to eliminate fossil fuel use
in transport.

Transport featured in three of our consumption chapters: Chapter 3
(cars), Chapter 5 (planes), and Chapter 15 (road freight and sea
freight). So there are two sorts of transport to address: passenger
transport, and freight. Our unit of passenger transport is the
passenger-kilometre (p-km). If a car carries one person a distance of
100 km, it delivers 100 p-km of transportation. If it carries four
people the same distance, it has delivered 400 p-km. Similarly our unit
of freight transport is the ton-km (t-km). If a truck carries 5 t of
cargo a distance of 100 km then it has delivered 500 t-km of
freight-transport. We’ll measure the energy consumption of passenger
transport in “kWh per 100 passenger-kilometres,” and the energy con-
sumption of freight in “kWh per ton-km.” Notice that these measures are
the other way up compared to “miles per gallon”: whereas we like
vehicles to deliver *many* miles per gallon, we want energy-consumption
to be *few* kWh per 100 p-km.

We’ll start this chapter by discussing how to reduce the energy con-
sumption of surface transport. To understand how to reduce energy con-
sumption, we need to understand where the energy is going in surface
transport. Here are the three key concepts, which are explained in more
detail in Technical Chapter A.

1.  In *short-distance travel* with lots of starting and stopping, the
    energy mainly goes into speeding up the vehicle and its contents.
    Key strate- gies for consuming less in this sort of transportation
    are therefore to *weigh less*, and to *go further between stops*.
    Regenerative braking, which captures energy when slowing down, may
    help too. In addition, it helps to *move slower*, and to *move
    less*.
2.  In *long-distance travel* at steady speed, by train or automobile,
    most of the energy goes into making air swirl around, because you
    only have to accelerate the vehicle once. The key strategies for
    consuming less in this sort of transportation are therefore to *move
    slower*, and to *move less*, and to *use long, thin vehicles*.
3.  In all forms of travel, there’s an energy-conversion chain, which
    takes energy in some sort of fuel and uses some of it to push the
    vehicle

![](figure135.png)

![](figure134.png)

Figure 20.1. This chapter’s starting point: an urban luxury tractor. The
average UK car has a fuel consumption of 33 miles per gallon, which
corresponds to an energy consumption of 80 kWh per 100 km. Can we do
better?

1.  forwards. Inevitably this energy chain has inefficiencies. In a
    stan- dard fossil-fuel car, for example, only 25% is used for
    pushing, and roughly 75% of the energy is lost in making the engine
    and radiator hot. So a final strategy for consuming less energy is
    to make the energy-conversion chain more efficient.

These observations lead us to six principles of vehicle design and vehi-
cle use for more-efficient surface transport: *a)* reduce the frontal
area per person; *b)* reduce the vehicle’s weight per person; *c)* when
travelling, go at a steady speed and avoid using brakes; *d)* travel
more slowly; *e)* travel less; and *f)* make the energy chain more
efficient. We’ll now discuss a variety of ways to apply these
principles.

How to roll better
------------------

A widely quoted statistic says something along the lines of “only *1
percent* of the energy used by a car goes into moving the driver” – the
implication being that, surely, by being a bit smarter, we could make
cars *100* times more efficient? The answer is yes, almost, but only by
applying the princi- ples of vehicle design and vehicle use, listed
above, to *extreme* degrees.

One illustration of extreme vehicle design is an eco-car, which has
small frontal area and low weight, and – if any records are to be broken
– is carefully driven at a low and steady speed. The *Team Crocodile*
eco-car (figure 20.2) does 2184 miles per gallon (1.3 kWh per 100 km) at
a speed of 15 mph (24 km/h). Weighing 50 kg and shorter in height than a
traffic cone, it comfortably accommodates one teenage driver.

Hmm. I think that the driver of the urban tractor in figure 20.1 might
detect a change in “look, feel and performance” if we switched them to
the eco-car and instructed them to keep their speed below 15 miles per
hour. So, the idea that cars could easily be 100 times more energy
efficient is a myth. We’ll come back to the challenge of making
energy-efficient cars in a moment. But first, let’s see some other ways
of satisfying the principles of more-efficient surface transport.

Figure 20.3 shows a multi-passenger vehicle that is at least 25 times
more energy-efficient than a standard petrol car: a bicycle. The
bicycle’s performance (in terms of energy per distance) is about the
same as the eco- car’s. Its speed is the same, its mass is lower than
the eco-car’s (because the human replaces the fuel tank and engine), and
its effective frontal area is higher, because the cyclist is not so well
streamlined as the eco-car.

Figure 20.4 shows another possible replacement for the petrol car: a
train, with an energy-cost, if full, of 1.6 kWh per 100 passenger-km. In
contrast to the eco-car and the bicycle, trains manage to achieve
outstanding efficiency without travelling slowly, and without having a
low weight per person. Trains make up for their high speed and heavy
frame by exploiting the principle of small frontal area per person.
Whereas a cyclist

![](figure137.png)

Figure 20.2. Team Crocodile’s eco-car uses 1.3 kWh per 100 km. Photo
kindly provided by Team Crocodile. www.teamcrocodile.com

![](figure138.png)

Figure 20.3. “Babies on board.” This mode of transportation has an
energy cost of 1 kWh per 100 person-km.

![](figure139.png)

Figure 20.4. This 8-carriage train, at its maximum speed of 100mph (161
km/h), consumes 1.6 kWh per 100 passenger-km, if full.

and a regular car have effective frontal areas of about 0.8 m^2^ and 0.5
m^2^ re- spectively, a full commuter train from Cambridge to London has
a frontal area per passenger of 0.02 m^2^.

But whoops, now we’ve broached an ugly topic – the prospect of sharing a
vehicle with “all those horrible people.” Well, squish aboard, and let’s
ask: How much could consumption be reduced by a switch from personal
gas-guzzlers to excellent integrated public transport?

![](figure136.png)

Public transport
----------------

At its best, shared public transport is far more energy-efficient than
indi- vidual car-driving. A diesel-powered **coach**, carrying 49
passengers and doing 10 miles per gallon at 65 miles per hour, uses 6
kWh per 100 p-km – 13 times better than the single-person car.
Vancouver’s **trolleybuses** con- sume 270 kWh
per[^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#120) vehicle-km,
and have an average speed of 15 km/h. If the trolleybus has 40
passengers on board, then its passenger transport cost is 7 kWh per 100
p-km. The Vancouver **SeaBus** has a transport cost of 83 kWh per
vehicle-km at a speed of 13.5 km/h. It can seat 400 people, so its
passenger transport cost when full is 21 kWh per 100 p-km. London
**underground trains**, at peak times, use 4.4 kWh per 100 p-km – 18
times better than individual cars. Even **high-speed trains**, which
violate two of our energy-saving principles by going twice as fast as
the car and weighing a lot, are much more energy efficient: if the
electric high-speed train

Figure 20.5. Some public transports, and their energy-efficiencies, when
on best behaviour. Tubes, outer and inner. Two high-speed trains. The
electric one uses 3 kWh per 100 seat-km; the diesel, 9 kWh. Trolleybuses
in San Francisco. Vancouver SeaBus. Photo by Larry.

![](figure141.png)

Private vehicles: technology, legislation, and incentives
---------------------------------------------------------

The energy consumption of individual cars can be reduced. The wide range
of energy efficiencies of cars for sale proves this. In a single show-
room in 2006 you could buy a Honda Civic 1.4 that uses roughly 44 kWh
per 100 km, or a Honda NSX 3.2 that uses 116 kWh per 100 km (figure
20.9). The fact that people merrily *buy* from this wide range is also
proof that we need extra incentives and legislation to encourage the
blithe consumer to *choose* more energy-efficient cars. There are
various ways to help con- sumers prefer the Honda Civic over the Honda
NSX 3.2 gas-guzzler: raising the price of fuel; cranking up the showroom
tax (the tax on new cars) in proportion to the predicted lifetime
consumption of the vehicle; cranking up the road-tax on gas guzzlers;
parking privileges for economical cars (figure 20.10); or fuel
rationing. All such measures are unpopular with at least some voters.
Perhaps a better legislative tactic would be to *enforce* rea- sonable
energy-efficiency, rather than continuing to allow unconstrained choice;
for example, we could simply *ban*, from a certain date, the sale of
*any* car whose energy consumption is more than 80 kWh per 100 km; and
then, over time, reduce this ceiling to 60 kWh per 100 km, then 40 kWh
per 100 km, and beyond. Alternatively, to give the consumer more choice,
regulations could force car manufacturers to reduce the *average* energy
consumption of all the cars they sell. Additional legislation limiting
the weight and frontal area of vehicles would simultaneously reduce fuel
con- sumption and improve safety for other road-users (figure 20.11).
People today choose their cars to make fashion statements. With strong
efficiency legislation, there could still be a wide choice of fashions;
they’d all just happen to be energy-efficient. You could choose any
colour, as long as it was green.

Figure 20.9. Carbon pollution, in grams CO~2~ per km, of a selection of
cars for sale in the UK. The horizontal axis shows the emission rate,
and the height of the blue histogram indicates the number of models on
sale with those emissions in 2006. Source: www.newcarnet.co.uk. The
second horizontal scale indicates approximate energy consumptions,
assuming that 240 g CO~2~ is associated with 1 kWh of chemical energy.

![](figure145.png)

Figure 20.10. Special parking privileges for electric cars in Ann Arbor,
Michigan.

![](figure146.png)

Figure 20.11. Monstercars are just tall enough to completely obscure the
view and the visibility of pedestrians.

In the French city of Lyon, a privately-run public bicycle network,
V´elo’v, was introduced in 2005 and has proved popular. Lyon’s
population of 470 000 inhabitants is served by 2000 bikes distributed
around 175 cycle-stations in an area of 50 km^2^ (figure 20.15). In the
city centre, you’re usually within 400 metres of a cycle-station. Users
join the scheme by paying a subscription fee of €10 per year and may
then hire bicycles free for all trips lasting less than 30 minutes. For
longer hire periods, users pay up to €1 per hour. Short-term visitors to
Lyon can buy one-week subscriptions for €1.

### Other legislative opportunities

Speed limits are a simple knob that could be twiddled. As a rule, cars
that travel slower use less energy (see Chapter A). With practice,
drivers can learn to drive more economically: using the accelerator and
brake less and always driving in the highest possible gear can give a
20% reduction in fuel consumption.

Another way to reduce fuel consumption is to reduce congestion. Stop-
ping and starting, speeding up and slowing down, is a much less
efficient way to get around than driving smoothly. Idling in stationary
traffic is an especially poor deliverer of miles per gallon!

Congestion occurs when there are too many vehicles on the roads. So one
simple way to reduce congestion is to group travellers into fewer ve-
hicles. A striking way to think about a switch from cars to coaches is
to calculate the road area required by the two modes. Take a trunk road
on the verge of congestion, where the desired speed is 60 mph. The safe
dis- tance from one car to the next at 60 mph is 77 m. If we assume
there’s one car every 80 m and that each car contains 1.6 people, then
vacuuming up 40 people into a single coach frees up *two kilometres* of
road!

Congestion can be reduced by providing good alternatives (cycle lanes,
public transport), and by charging road users extra if they contribute
to congestion. In this chapter’s notes I describe a fair and simple
method for handling congestion-charging.

Enhancing cars
--------------

Assuming that the developed world’s love-affair with the car is not
about to be broken off, what are the technologies that can deliver
significant en- ergy savings? Savings of 10% or 20% are easy – we’ve
already discussed some ways to achieve them, such as making cars smaller
and lighter. Another option is to switch from petrol to diesel. Diesel
engines are more expensive to make, but they tend to be more
fuel-efficient. But are there technologies that can radically increase
the efficiency of the energy-conversion chain? (Recall that in a
standard petrol car, 75% of the energy is turned

![](figure148.png)

Figure 20.15. A V´elo’v station in Lyon.

![](figure149.png)

Figure 20.16. With congestion like this, it’s faster to walk.

![](figure150.png)

into heat and blown out of the radiator!) And what about the goal of
getting off fossil fuels?

In this section, we’ll discuss five technologies: regenerative braking;
hybrid cars; electric cars; hydrogen-powered cars; and compressed-air
cars.

### Regenerative braking

There are four ways to capture energy as a vehicle slows down.

1.  An electric generator coupled to the wheels can charge up an
    electric battery or supercapacitor.
2.  Hydraulic motors driven by the wheels can make compressed air,
    stored in a small canister.
3.  Energy can be stored in a flywheel.
4.  Braking energy can be stored as gravitational energy by driving the
    vehicle up a ramp whenever you want to slow down. This gravitational
    energy storage option is rather inflexible, since there must be a
    ramp in the right place. It’s an option that’s most useful for
    trains, and it is illustrated by the London Underground’s Victoria
    line, which has hump-back stations. Each station is at the top of a
    hill in the track. Arriving trains are automatically slowed down by
    the hill, and departing trains are accelerated as they go down the
    far side of the hill. The hump-back-station design provides an
    energy saving of 5% and makes the trains run 9% faster.

Electric regenerative braking (using a battery to store the energy)
salvages roughly 50% of the car’s energy in a braking event, leading to
perhaps a 20% reduction in the energy cost of city driving.

Figure 20.17. A BMW 530i modified by Artemis Intelligent Power to use
digital hydraulics. Lower left: A 6-litre accumulator (the red
canister), capable of storing about 0.05 kWh of energy in compressed
nitrogen. Lower right: Two 200 kW hydraulic motors, one for each rear
wheel, which both accelerate and decelerate the car. The car is still
powered by its standard 190 kW petrol engine, but thanks to the digital
hydraulic transmission and regenerative braking, it uses 30% less fuel.

Regenerative systems using flywheels and hydraulics seem to work a
little better than battery-based systems, salvaging at least 70% of the
brak- ing energy. Figure 20.17 describes a hybrid car with a petrol
engine powering digitally-controlled hydraulics. On a standard driving
cycle, this car uses 30% less fuel than the original petrol car. In
urban driving, its energy consumption is halved, from 131 kWh per 100 km
to 62 kWh per 100 km (20 mpg to 43 mpg). (Credit for this performance
improvement must be shared between regenerative braking and the use of
hybrid technology.) Hydraulics and flywheels are both promising ways to
handle regenerative braking because small systems can handle large
powers. A flywheel system weighing just 24 kg (figure 20.18), designed
for energy storage in a racing car, can store 400 kJ (0.1 kWh) of energy
– enough energy to acceler- ate an ordinary car up to 60 miles per hour
(97 km/h); and it can accept or deliver 60 kW of power. Electric
batteries capable of delivering that much power would weigh about 200
kg. So, unless you’re already carrying that much battery on board, an
electrical regenerative-braking system should probably use capacitors to
store braking energy. Super-capacitors have similar energy-storage and
power-delivery parameters to the flywheel’s.

### Hybrid cars

Hybrid cars such as the Toyota Prius (figure 20.19) have more-efficient
engines and electric regenerative braking, but to be honest, today’s
hybrid vehicles don’t really stand out from the crowd (figure 20.9).

The horizontal bars in figure 20.9 highlight a few cars including two
hybrids. Whereas the average new car in the UK emits 168 g, the hybrid
Prius emits about 100 g of CO~2~ per km, as do several other non-hybrid
vehicles – the VW Polo blue motion emits 99 g/km, and there’s a Smart
car that emits 88 g/km.

The Lexus RX 400h is the second hybrid, advertised with the slogan “LOW
POLLUTION. ZERO GUILT.” But its CO~2~ emissions are 192 g/km – worse
than the average UK car! The advertising standards authority ruled that
this advertisement breached the advertising codes on Truthfulness,
Comparisons and Environmental claims. “We considered that ... readers
were likely to understand that the car caused little or no harm to the
envir- onment, which was not the case, and had low emissions in
comparison with all cars, which was also not the case.”

In practice, hybrid technologies seem to give fuel savings of 20 or 30%.
So neither these petrol/electric hybrids, nor the petrol/hydraulic
hybrid featured in figure 20.17 seems to me to have really cracked the
transport challenge. A 30% reduction in fossil-fuel consumption is
impressive, but it’s not enough by this book’s standards. Our opening
assumption was that we want to get off fossil fuels, or at least to
reduce fossil fuel use by 90%. Can this goal be achieved without
reverting to bicycles?

![](figure152.png)

Figure 20.18. A flywheel regenerative-braking system. Photos courtesy of
Flybrid Systems.

![](figure153.png)

Figure 20.19. Toyota Prius – according to Jeremy Clarkson, “a very
expensive, very complex, not terribly green, slow, cheaply made, and
pointless way of moving around.”

![](figure421.png)

### Electric vehicles

The REVA electric car was launched in June 2001 in Bangalore and is ex-
ported to the UK as the G-Wiz. The G-Wiz’s electric motor has a peak
power of 13 kW, and can produce a sustained power of 4.8 kW. The motor
provides regenerative braking. It is powered by eight 6-volt lead acid
batteries, which when fully charged give a range of “up to 77 km.” A
full charge consumes 9.7 kWh of electricity. These figures imply a
transport cost of 13 kWh per 100 km.

Manufacturers always quote the best possible performance of their
products. What happens in real life? The real-life performance of a
G-Wiz in London is shown in figure 20.21. Over the course of 19
recharges, the average transport cost of this G-Wiz is 21 kWh per 100 km
– about four times better than an average fossil fuel car. The best
result was 16 kWh per 100 km, and the worst was 33 kWh per 100 km. If
you are interested in carbon emissions, 21 kWh per 100 km is equivalent
to 105 g CO~2~ per km, assuming that electricity has a footprint of 500
g CO~2~ per kWh.

Now, the G-Wiz sits at one end of the performance spectrum. What if we
demand more – more acceleration, more speed, and more range? At the
other end of the spectrum is the Tesla Roadster. The Tesla Roadster 2008
has a range of 220 miles (354 km); its lithium-ion battery pack stores
53 kWh and weighs 450 kg (120 Wh/kg). The vehicle weighs 1220 kg and its
motor’s maximum power is 185 kW. What is the energy-consumption of this
muscle car? Remarkably, it’s better than the G-Wiz: 15 kWh per 100 km.
Evidence that a range of 354 km should be enough for most people most of
the time comes from the fact that only 8.3% of commuters travel more
than 30 km to their workplace.

I’ve looked up the performance figures for lots of electric vehicles –
they’re listed in this chapter’s end-notes – and they seem to be
consistent with this summary: electric vehicles can deliver transport at
an energy cost of roughly 15 kWh per 100 km. That’s five times better
than our baseline fossil-car, and significantly better than any hybrid
cars. Hurray! To achieve economical transport, we don’t have to huddle
together in public transport – we can still hurtle around, enjoying all
the pleasures and freedoms of solo travel, thanks to electric vehicles.

Figure 20.20. Electric vehicles. From left to right: the G-Wiz; the
rotting corpse of a Sinclair C5; a Citroën Berlingo; and an Elettrica.

![](figure422.png)

Figure 20.21. Electricity required to recharge a G-Wiz versus distance
driven. Measurements were made at the socket.

![](figure423.png)

Figure 20.22. Tesla Roadster: 15 kWh per 100 km. www.teslamotors.com.

![](figure151.png)

Figure 20.23. Energy requirements of different forms of passenger
transport. The vertical coordinate shows the energy consumption in kWh
per 100 passenger-km. The horizontal coordinate indicates the speed of
the transport. The “Car (1)” is an average UK car doing 33 miles per
gallon with a single occupant. The “Bus” is the average performance of
all London buses. The “Underground system” shows the performance of the
whole London Underground system. The catamaran is a diesel-powered
vessel. I’ve indicated on the left-hand side equivalent fuel
efficiencies in passenger-miles per imperial gallon (p-mpg). Hollow
point-styles show best-practice performance, assuming all seats of a
vehicle are in use. Filled point-styles indicate actual performance of a
vehicle in typical use. See also figure 15.8 (energy requirements of
freight transport).

This moment of celebration feels like a good time to unveil this
chapter’s big summary diagram, figure 20.23, which shows the energy
requirements of all the forms of passenger-transport we have discussed
and a couple that are still to come.

OK, the race is over, and I’ve announced two winners – public transport,
and electric vehicles. But are there any other options crossing the
finishing line? We have yet to hear about the compressed-air-powered car
and the hydrogen car. If either of these turns out to be better than
electric car, it won’t affect the long-term picture very much: whichever
of these three technologies we went for, the vehicles would be charged
up using energy generated from a “green” source.

### Compressed-air cars

Air-powered vehicles are not a new idea. Hundreds of trams powered by
compressed air and hot water plied the streets of Nantes and Paris from
1879 to 1911. Figure 20.24 shows a German pneumatic locomotive from
1958. I think that in terms of energy efficiency the compressed-air
tech- nique for storing energy isn’t as good as electric batteries. The
problem is that compressing the air generates *heat* that’s unlikely to
be used efficiently; and expanding the air generates *cold*, another
by-product that is unlikely to be used efficiently. But compressed air
may be a superior technology to electric batteries in other ways. For
example, air can be compressed thous- ands of times and doesn’t wear
out! It’s interesting to note, however, that the first product sold by
the Aircar company is actually an *electric* scooter.
[www.theaircar.com/acf]

There’s talk of Tata Motors in India manufacturing air-cars, but it’s
hard to be sure whether the compressed-air vehicle is going to see a
revival, because no-one has published the specifications of any modern
prototypes. Here’s the fundamental limitation: the energy-density of
compressed-air energy-stores is only about 11–28 Wh per kg, which is
similar to lead-acid batteries, and roughly five times smaller than
lithium-ion batteries. (See figure 26.13, p199, for details of other
storage technologies.) So the range of a compressed-air car will only
ever be as good as the range of the earliest electric cars.
Compressed-air storage systems do have three advantages over batteries:
longer life, cheaper construction, and fewer nasty chemicals.

### Hydrogen cars – blimp your ride

I think hydrogen is a hyped-up bandwagon. I’ll be delighted to be proved
wrong, but I don’t see how hydrogen is going to help us with our energy
problems. Hydrogen is not a miraculous *source* of energy; it’s just an
en- ergy *carrier*, like a rechargeable battery. And it is a rather
inefficient energy carrier, with a whole bunch of practical defects.

The “hydrogen economy” received support from *Nature* magazine in

![](figure154.png)

Figure 20.24. Top: A compressed-air tram taking on air and steam in
Nantes. Powering the trams of Nantes used 4.4 kg of coal (36 kWh) per
vehicle-km, or 115 kWh per 100 p-km, if the trams were full. [5qhvcb]
Bottom: A compressed-air locomotive; weight 9.2 t, pressure 175 bar,
power 26 kW; photo courtesy of Rüdiger Fach, Rolf-Dieter Reichert, and
Frankfurter Feldbahnmuseum.

![](figure155.png)

Figure 20.25. The Hummer H2H: embracing the green revolution, the
American way. Photo courtesy of General Motors.

a column praising California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger for filling
up a hydrogen-powered Hummer (figure 20.25). Nature’s article lauded
Arnold’s vision of hydrogen-powered cars replacing “polluting models”
with the quote “the governor is a real-life climate action hero.” But
the critical question that needs to be asked when such hydrogen heroism
is on display is “where is the *energy* to come from to *make* the
hydrogen?” Moreover, converting energy to and from hydrogen can only be
done inef- ficiently – at least, with today’s technology.

Here are some numbers.

-   In the CUTE (Clean Urban Transport for Europe) project, which was
    intended to demonstrate the feasibility and reliability of fuelcell
    buses and hydrogen technology, fuelling the hydrogen buses required
    between 80% and 200% *more* energy than the baseline diesel bus.
-   Fuelling the *Hydrogen 7*, the hydrogen-powered car made by BMW,
    requires 254 kWh per 100 km – *220% more* energy than an average
    European car.

If our task were “please stop using fossil fuels for transport, allowing
your- self the assumption that *infinite* quantities of green
electricity are available for free,” then of course an energy-profligate
transport solution like hy- drogen might be a contender (though hydrogen
faces other problems). But *green electricity is not free*. Indeed,
getting green electricity on the scale of our current consumption is
going to be very challenging. The fossil fuel challenge is an energy
challenge. The climate-change problem is an energy problem. We need to
focus on solutions that use less energy, not “solutions” that use more!
*I know of no form of land transport whose energy consumption is worse
than this hydrogen car*. (The only transport methods I know that are
worse are jet-skis – using about 500 kWh per 100 km – and the
*Earthrace* biodiesel-powered speed-boat, absurdly called an eco-boat,
which uses 800 kWh per 100 p-km.)

Hydrogen advocates may say “the BMW Hydrogen 7 is just an early
prototype, and it’s a luxury car with lots of muscle – the technology is
going to get more efficient.” Well, I hope so, because it has a lot of
catching up to do. The Tesla Roadster (figure 20.22) is an early
prototype too, and it’s also a luxury car with lots of muscle. And it’s
more than ten times more energy-efficient than the Hydrogen 7! Feel free
to put your money on the hydrogen horse if you want, and if it wins in
the end, fine. But it seems daft to back the horse that’s so far behind
in the race. Just look at figure 20.23 – if I hadn’t squished the top of
the vertical axis, the hydrogen car would not have fitted on the page!

Yes, the Honda fuel-cell car, the FCX Clarity, does better – it rolls in
at 69 kWh per 100 km – but my prediction is that after all the “zero-
emissions” trumpeting is over, we’ll find that hydrogen cars use just as
much energy as the average fossil car of today.

![](figure156.png)

Figure 20.26. BMW Hydrogen 7. Energy consumption: 254 kWh per 100 km.
Photo from BMW.

![](figure157.png)

Figure 20.27. The Earthrace “eco-boat.” Photo by David Castor.

![](figure158.png)

Figure 20.28. The Honda FCX Clarity hydrogen-powered fuel-cell sedan,
with a Jamie Lee Curtis for scale. Photo courtesy of
automobiles.honda.com.

Here are some other problems with hydrogen. Hydrogen is a less
convenient energy storage medium than most liquid fuels, because of its
bulk, whether stored as a high pressure gas or as a liquid (which
requires a temperature of -253 °C). Even at a pressure of 700 bar (which
requires a hefty pressure vessel) its energy density (energy per unit
volume) is 22% of gasoline’s. The cryogenic tank of the BMW Hydrogen 7
weighs 120 kg and stores 8 kg of hydrogen. Furthermore, hydrogen
gradually leaks out of any practical
container.[^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#131) If you
park your hydrogen car at the railway station with a full tank and come
back a week later, you should expect to find most of the hydrogen has
gone.[^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#131)

### Some questions about electric vehicles

#### You’ve shown that electric cars are more energy-efficient than fossil cars. But are they better if our objective is to reduce CO~2~ emissions, and the electricity is still generated by fossil power- stations?

This is quite an easy calculation to do. Assume the electric vehicle’s
energy cost is 20 kWh(e) per 100 km. (I think 15 kWh(e) per 100 km is
perfectly possible, but let’s play sceptical in this calculation.) If
grid electricity has a carbon footprint of 500 g per kWh(e) then the
effective emissions of this vehicle are **100 g CO~2~ per km**, which is
as good as the best fossil cars (figure 20.9). So I conclude that
switching to electric cars is *already* a good idea, even before we
green our electricity supply.

#### Electric cars, like fossil cars, have costs of both manufacture and use. Electric cars may cost less to use, but if the batteries don’t last very long, shouldn’t you pay more attention to the manufacturing cost?

Yes, that’s a good point. My transport diagram shows only the use cost.
If electric cars require new batteries every few years, my numbers may
be underestimates. The batteries in a Prius are expected to last just 10
years, and a new set would cost £3500. Will anyone want to own a 10-year
old Prius and pay that cost? It could be predicted that most Priuses
will be junked at age 10 years. This is certainly a concern for all
electric vehicles that have batteries. I guess I’m optimistic that, as
we switch to electric vehicles, battery technology is going to improve.

#### I live in a hot place. How could I drive an electric car? I demand power-hungry air-conditioning!

There’s an elegant fix for this demand: fit 4 m^2^ of photovoltaic
panels in the upward-facing surfaces of the electric car. If the
air-conditioning is needed, the sun must surely be shining.
20%-efficient panels will generate up to 800 W, which is enough to power
a car’s air-conditioning. The panels might even make a useful
contribution to charging the car when it’s parked, too. Solar-powered
vehicle cooling was included in a Mazda in 1993; the solar cells were
embedded in the glass sunroof.

#### I live in a cold place. How could I drive an electric car? I demand power-hungry heating!

The motor of an electric vehicle, when it’s running, will on average use
something like 10 kW, with an efficiency of 90–95%. Some of the lost
power, the other 5–10%, will be dissipated as heat in the motor. Perhaps
electric cars that are going to be used in cold places can be carefully
designed so that this motor-generated heat, which might amount to 250 or
500 W, can be piped from the motor into the car. That much power would
provide some significant windscreen demisting or body-warming.

#### Are lithium-ion batteries safe in an accident?

Some lithium-ion batteries are unsafe when short-circuited or
overheated, but the battery industry is now producing safer batteries
such as lithium phosphate. There’s a fun safety video at
www.valence.com.

#### Is there enough lithium to make all the batteries for a huge fleet of electric cars?

World lithium reserves are estimated to be 9.5 million tons in ore
deposits (p175). A lithium-ion battery is 3% lithium. If we assume each
vehicle has a 200 kg battery, then we need 6 kg of lithium per vehicle.
So the estimated reserves in ore deposits are enough to make the
batteries for 1.6 billion vehicles. That’s more than the number of cars
in the world today (roughly 1 billion) – but not much more, so the
amount of lithium may be a concern, especially when we take into account
the competing ambitions of the nuclear fusion posse (Chapter 24) to
guzzle lithium in their reactors. There’s many thousands times more
lithium in sea water, so perhaps the oceans will provide a useful
backup. However, lithium specialist R. Keith Evans says “concerns
regarding lithium availability for hybrid or electric vehicle batteries
or other foreseeable applications are unfounded.” And anyway, other
lithium-free battery technologies such as zinc-air recharge- ables are
being developed [www.revolttechnology.com]. I think the elec- tric car
is a goer!

The future of flying?
---------------------

The superjumbo A380 is said by Airbus to be “a highly fuel-efficient
air- craft.” In fact, it burns just 12% less fuel per passenger than a
747.

Boeing has announced similar breakthroughs: their new 747–8 Inter-
continental, trumpeted for its planet-saving properties, is (according
to Boeing’s advertisements) only 15% more fuel-efficient than a 747–400.

This slender rate of progress (contrasted with cars, where changes in
technology deliver two-fold or even ten-fold improvements in efficiency)
is explained in Technical Chapter C. Planes are up against a fundamental
limit imposed by the laws of physics. Any plane, whatever its size, *has
to* expend an energy of about 0.4 kWh per ton-km on keeping up and
keeping

![](figure159.png)

Figure 20.29. Airbus A380.

moving. Planes have already been fantastically optimized, and there is
no prospect of significant improvements in plane efficiency.

For a time, I thought that the way to solve the long-distance-transport
problem was to revert to the way it was done before planes: ocean
liners. Then I looked at the numbers. The sad truth is that ocean liners
use more energy per passenger-km than jumbo jets. The QE2 uses four
times as much energy per passenger-km as a jumbo. OK, it’s a luxury
vessel; can we do better with slower tourist-class liners? From 1952 to
1968, the eco- nomical way to cross the Atlantic was in two Dutch-built
liners known as “The Economy Twins,” the Maasdam and the
Rijnsdam[^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#133). These
travelled at 16.5 knots (30.5 km/h), so the crossing from Britain to New
York took eight days. Their energy consumption, if they carried a full
load of 893 passengers, was 103 kWh per 100 p-km. At a typical 85%
occupancy, the energy consumption was 121 kWh per 100 pkm – more than
twice that of the jumbo jet. To be fair to the boats, they are not only
providing trans- portation: they also provide the passengers and crew
with hot air, hot water, light, and entertainment for several days; but
the energy saved back home from being cooped up on the boat is dwarfed
by the boat’s energy consumption, which, in the case of the QE2, is
about 3000 kWh per day per passenger.

So, sadly, I don’t think boats are going to beat planes in energy con-
sumption. If eventually we want a way of travelling large distances
without fossil fuels, perhaps nuclear-powered ships are an interesting
option (figures 20.31 & 20.32).

What about freight?
-------------------

International shipping is a surprisingly efficient user of fossil fuels;
so get- ting road transport off fossil fuels is a higher priority than
getting ships off fossil fuels. But fossil fuels are a finite resource,
and eventually ships must be powered by something else. Biofuels *may*
work out. Another option will be nuclear power. The first
nuclear-powered ship for carrying cargo and passengers was the NS
Savannah, launched in 1962 as part of President Dwight D. Eisenhower’s
*Atoms for Peace* initiative (figure 20.31). Powered by one 74-MW
nuclear reactor driving a 15-MW motor, the Sa- vannah had a service
speed of 21 knots (39 km/h) and could carry 60 pas- sengers and 14000 t
of cargo. That’s a cargo transport cost of 0.14 kWh per ton-km. She
could travel 500 000 km without refuelling. There are already many
nuclear-powered ships, both military and civilian. Russia has ten
nuclear-powered ice-breakers, for example, of which seven are still
active. Figure 20.32 shows the nuclear ice-breaker Yamal, which has two
171-MW reactors, and motors that can deliver 55 MW.

![](figure160.png)

Figure 20.30. TSS Rijndam.

![](figure161.png)

Figure 20.31. NS Savannah, the first commercial nuclear-powered cargo
vessel, passing under the Golden Gate Bridge in 1962.

![](figure162.png)

Figure 20.32. The nuclear ice-breaker Yamal, carrying 100 tourists to
the North Pole in 2001. Photo by Wofratz.

“Hang on! You haven’t mentioned magnetic levitation”
----------------------------------------------------

The German company, Transrapid, which made the maglev train for Shang-
hai, China (figure 20.33), says: “The Transrapid Superspeed Maglev
System is unrivaled when it comes to noise emission, energy consumption,
and land use. The innovative non-contact transportation system provides
mobility without the environment falling by the wayside.”

Magnetic levitation is one of many technologies that gets hyped up when
people are discussing energy issues. In energy-consumption terms, the
comparison with other fast trains is actually not as flattering as the
hype suggests. The Transrapid site compares the Transrapid with the
Inter- CityExpress (ICE), a high-speed electric train.

Fast trains compared at 200 km/h (125mph)

Transrapid

2.2 kWh per 100 seat-km

ICE

2.9 kWh per 100 seat-km

The main reasons why maglev is slightly better than the ICE are: the
magnetic propulsion motor has high efficiency; the train itself has low
mass, because most of the propulsion system is in the track, rather than
the train; and more passengers are inside the train because space is not
needed for motors. Oh, and perhaps because the data are from the maglev
company’s website, so are bound to make the maglev look better!

Incidentally, people who have seen the Transrapid train in Shanghai tell
me that at full speed it is “about as quiet as a jet aircraft.”

Notes and further reading
-------------------------

page no.

119 *A widely quoted statistic says “Only 1% of fuel energy in a car
goes into moving the driver.”* In fact the percentage in this myth
varies in size as it commutes around the urban community. Some people
say “5% of the energy goes into moving the driver.” Others say “A mere
*three tenths of 1 percent* of fuel energy goes into moving the driver.”
[4qgg8q] My take, by the way, is that none of these statistics is
correct or helpful.

– *The bicycle’s performance is about the same as the eco-car’s.*
Cycling on a single-person bike costs about 1.6 kWh per 100 km, assuming
a speed of 20 km/h. For details and references, see Chapter A, p262.

– *The 8-carriage stopping train from Cambridge to London* (figure 20.4)
weighs 275 tonnes, and can carry 584 passengers seated. Its maximum
speed is 100mph (161 km/h), and the power output is 1.5 MW. If all the
seats are occupied, this train at top speed consumes at most *1.6 kWh
per 100 passenger-km*.

![](figure163.png)

Figure 20.33. A maglev train at Pudong International Airport, Shanghai.

“driving without wheels; flying without wings.”

Photo by Alex Needham.

![](figure164.png)

Figure 20.34. Nine out of ten vehicles in London are G-Wizes. (And 95%
of statistics are made up.)

120 *London Underground*. A Victoria-line train consists of four
30.5-ton and four 20.5-ton cars (the former carrying the motors). Laden,
an average train weighs 228 tons. The maximum speed is 45 mile/h. The
average speed is 31 mph. A train with most seats occupied carries about
350 passengers; crush-loaded, the train takes about 620. The energy
consumption at peak times is about *4.4 kWh per 100 passenger-km*
(Catling, 1966).

121 *High-speed train*. A diesel-powered intercity 125 train (on the
right in figure 20.5) weighs 410 tons. When travelling at 125mph, the
power delivered “at the rail” is 2.6 MW. The number of passengers in a
full train is about 500. The average fuel consumption is about 0.84
litres of diesel per 100 seat-km [5o5x5m], which is a transport cost of
about *9 kWh per 100 seat-km*. The Class 91 electric train (on the left
in figure 20.5) travels at 140 mph (225 km/h) and uses 4.5 MW. According
to Roger Kemp, this train’s average energy consumption is *3 kWh per 100
seat-km* [5o5x5m]. The government document [5fbeg9] says that east-coast
mainline and west-coast mainline trains both consume about 15 kWh per km
(whole train). The number of seats in each train is 526 or 470
respectively. So that’s *2.9–3.2 kWh per 100 seat-km*.

– *the total energy cost of all London’s underground trains, was 15 kWh
per 100 p-km. ... The energy cost of all London buses was 32 kWh per 100
pkm*. Source: [679rpc]. Source for train speeds and bus speeds: Ridley
and Catling (1982).

– *Croydon Tramlink*.
www.tfl.gov.uk/assets/downloads/corporate/TfL-environment-report-
2007.pdf, www.tfl.gov.uk/assets/downloads/corporate/London-Travel-
Report-2007-final.pdf, www.croydon-tramlink.co.uk.

123*... provision of excellent cycle facilities ...* The UK street
design guide [www.manualforstreets.org.uk] encourages designing streets
to make 20 miles per hour the natural speed. See also Franklin (2007).

124*A fair and simple method for handling congestion-charging*. I learnt
a brilliant way to automate congestion-charging from Stephen Salter. A
simple daily congestion charge, as levied in London, sends only a crude
signal to drivers; once a car-owner has decided to pay the day’s charge
and drive into a congestion zone, he has no incentive to drive *little*
in the zone. Nor is he rewarded with any rebate if he carefully chooses
routes in the zone that are not congested. Instead of having a
centralized authority that decides in advance when and where the
congestion-charge zones are, with expensive and intrusive monitoring and
recording of vehicle movements into and within all those zones, Salter
has a simpler, decentralized, anonymous method of charging drivers for
driving in heavy, slow traffic, wherever and whenever it actually
exists. The system would operate nationwide. Here’s how it works. We
want a device that answers the question “how congested is the traffic I
am driving in?” A good measure of congestion is “how many other active
vehicles are close to mine?” In fast-moving traffic, the spacing between
vehicles is larger than slow-moving traffic. Traffic that’s trundling in
tedious queues is the

![](figure165.png)

Figure 20.35. 100 km in a single-person car, compared with 100 km on a
fully-occupied electric high-speed train.

![](figure424.png)

Figure 20.36. Trams work nicely in Istanbul and Prague too.

most densely packed. The number of nearby vehicles that are active can
be sensed anonymously by fitting in every vehicle a radio
transmitter/receiver (like a very cheap mobile phone) that transmits
little radio-bleeps at a steady rate whenever the engine is running, and
that counts the number of bleeps it hears from other vehicles. The
congestion charge would be proportional to the number of bleeps
received; this charge could be paid at refuelling stations whenever the
vehicle is refuelled. The radio transmitter/receiver would replace the
current UK road tax disc.

126*hydraulics and flywheels salvage at least 70% of the braking
energy*. Compressed air is used for regenerative braking in trucks;
eaton.com say “hydraulic launch assist” captures 70% of the kinetic
energy. [5cp27j] The flywheel systemof flybridsystems.com also captures
70% of the kinetic energy. www.flybridsystems.com/F1System.html
*Electric regenerative braking salvages 50%*. Source: E4tech (2007).

–*Electric batteries capable of delivering 60 kW would weigh about 200
kg*. Good lithium-ion batteries have a specific power of 300 W/kg (Horie
et al., 1997; Mindl, 2003).

–*the average new car in the UK emits 168 g CO~2~ per km*. This is the
figure for the year 2006 (King, 2008). The average emissions of a new
passenger vehicle in the USA were 255 g per km (King, 2008).

–*The Toyota Prius has a more-efficient engine*. The Prius’s petrol
engine uses the Atkinson cycle, in contrast to the conventional Otto
cycle. By cunningly mixing electric power and petrol power as the
driver’s demands change, the Prius gets by with a smaller engine than is
normal in a car of its weight, and converts petrol to work more
efficiently than a conventional petrol engine.

–*Hybrid technologies give fuel savings of 20% or 30%*. For example,
from Hitachi’s research report describing hybrid trains (Kaneko et al.,
2004): high- efficiency power generation and regenerative braking are
“expected to give fuel savings of approximately 20% compared with
conventional diesel-powered trains.”

127*Only 8.3% of commuters travel over 30 km to their workplace*.
Source: Eddington (2006). The dependence of the range of an electric car
on the size of its battery is discussed in Chapter A (p261).

–*Lots of electric vehicles*. They are all listed below, in no
particular order. Performance figures are mainly from the manufacturers.
As we saw on p127, real-life performance doesn’t always match
manufacturers’ claims.

Th!nk Electric cars from Norway. The five-door Th!nk Ox has a range of
200- km. Its batteries weigh 350 kg, and the car weighs 1500 kg in
total. Its energy consumption is approximately 20 kWh per 100 km.
www.think.no

Electric Smart Car “The electric version is powered by a 40 bhp motor,
can go- up to 70 miles, and has a top speed of 70 mph. Recharging is
done through a standard electrical power point and costs about £1.20,
producing the equiv- alent of 60 g/km of carbon dioxide emissions at the
power station. [cf. the equivalent petrol-powered Smart: 116 g/km.] A
full recharge takes

![](figure166.png)

Figure 20.37. Th!nk Ox. Photo from www.think.no.

about eight hours, but the battery can be topped up from 80%-drained to
80%-charged in about three-and-a-half hours.” [www.whatcar.com/news-
article.aspx?NA=226488]

Berlingo Electrique 500E, an urban delivery van (figure 20.20), has 27
nicad bat- teries and a 28 kW motor. It can transport a payload of 500
kg. Top speed: 100 km/h; range: 100 km. 25 kWh per 100 km. (Estimate
kindly supplied by a Berlingo owner.) [4wm2w4]

i MiEV This electric car is projected to have a range of 160 km with a
16 kWh bat- tery pack. That’s 10 kWh per 100 km – better than the G-Wiz
– and whereas it’s hard to fit two adult Europeans in a G-Wiz, the
Mitsubishi prototype has four doors and four full-size seats (figure
20.38). [658ode]

EV1 The two-seater General Motors EV1 had a range of 120 to 240 km per
charge, with nickel-metal hydride batteries holding 26.4 kWh. That’s an
energy con- sumption of between 11 and 22 kWh per 100 km.

Lightning (figure 20.39) – has four 120 kW brushless motors, one on each
wheel, regenerative braking, and fast-charging Nanosafe lithium titanate
batteries. A capacity of 36 kWh gives a range of 200 miles (320 km).
That’s 11 kWh per 100 km.

Aptera This fantastic slippery fish is a two-seater vehicle, said to
have an energy cost of 6 kWh per 100 km. It has a drag coefficient of
0.11 (figure 20.40). Electric and hybrid models are being developed.

Loremo Like the Aptera, the Loremo (figure 20.41) has a small frontal
area and small drag coefficient (0.2) and it’s going to be available in
both fossil-fuel and electric versions. It has two adult seats and two
rear-facing kiddie seats. The Loremo EV will have lithium ion batteries
and is predicted to have an energy cost of 6 kWh per 100 km, a top speed
of 170 km/h, and a range of 153 km. It weighs 600 kg.

eBox The eBox has a lithium-ion battery with a capacity of 35 kWh and a
weight of 280 kg; and a range of 140–180 miles. Its motor has a peak
power of 120 kW and can produce a sustained power of 50 kW. Energy
consumption: 12 kWh per 100 km.

Ze-0 A five-seat, five-door car. Maximum speed: 50mph. Range: 50 miles.
Weight, including batteries: 1350 kg. Lead acid batteries with capacity
of 18 kWh. Motor: 15 kW. 22.4 kWh per 100 km.

e500 An Italian Fiat-like car, with two doors and 4 seats. Maximum
speed: 60 mph. Range in city driving: 75 miles. Battery: lithium-ion
polymer.

MyCar The MyCar is an Italian-designed two-seater. Maximum speed: 40
mph. Maximum range: 60 miles. Lead-acid battery.

Mega City A two-seater car with a maximum continuous power of 4 kW and
max- imum speed of 40 mph: 11.5 kWh per 100 km. Weight unladen
(including batteries) – 725 kg. The lead batteries have a capacity of 10
kWh.

Xebra Is claimed to have a 40 km range from a 4.75 kWh charge. 12 kWh
per 100 km. Maximum speed 65 km/h. Lead-acid batteries.

![](figure167.png)

Figure 20.38. The i MiEV from Mitsubishi Motors Corporation. It has a 47
kW motor, weighs 1080 kg, and has a top speed of 130 km/h.

![](figure168.png)

Figure 20.39. Lightning: 11 kWh per 100 km. Photo from
www.lightningcarcompany.co.uk.

![](figure169.png)

Figure 20.40. The Aptera. 6 kWh per 100 km. Photo from www.aptera.com.

![](figure170.png)

Figure 20.41. The Loremo. 6 kWh per 100 km. Photo from
evolution.loremo.com.

TREV The Two-Seater Renewable Energy Vehicle (TREV) is a prototype
devel- oped by the University of South Australia (figure 20.42). This
three-wheeler has a range of 150 km, a top speed of 120 km/h, a mass of
300 kg, and lithium-ion polymer batteries weighing 45 kg. During a real
3000 km trip, the energy consumption was 6.2 kWh per 100 km.

Venturi Fetish Has a 28 kWh battery, weighing 248 kg. The car weighs
1000 kg. Range 160–250 km. That’s 11–17 kWh per 100 km.
www.venturifetish.fr/fetish.html

Toyota RAV4 EV This vehicle – an all-electric mini-SUV – was sold by
Toyota be- tween 1997 and 2003 (figure 20.43). The RAV4 EV has 24
12-volt 95 Ah NiMH batteries capable of storing 27.4 kWh of energy; and
a range of 130 to 190 km. So that’s an energy consumption of 14–21 kWh
per 100 km. The RAV4 EV was popular with Jersey Police force.

Phoenix SUT – a five-seat “sport utility truck” made in California – has
a range of “up to 130 miles” from a 35 kWh lithium-ion battery pack.
(That’s 17 kWh per 100 km.) The batteries can be recharged from a
special outlet in 10 minutes. www.gizmag.com/go/7446/

Modec delivery vehicle Modec carries two tons a distance of 100 miles.
Kerb weight 3000 kg. www.modec.co.uk

Smith Ampere Smaller delivery van, 24 kWh lithium ion batteries. Range
“over 100 miles.” www.smithelectricvehicles.com

Electric minibus From www.smithelectricvehicles.com: 40 kWh lithium ion
battery pack. 90 kW motor with regenerative brakes. Range “up to 100
miles.” 15 seats. Vehicle kerb weight 3026 kg. Payload 1224 kg. That’s a
vehicle-performance of at best 25 kWh per 100 km. If the vehicle is
fully occupied, it could deliver transportation at an impressive cost of
2 kWh per 100 p-km.

Electric coach The Thunder Sky bus has a range of 180 miles and a
recharge time of three hours. www.thunder-sky.com

Electric scooters The Vectrix is a substantial scooter (figure 20.44).
Its battery (nickel metal hydride) has a capacity of 3.7 kWh. It can be
driven for up to 68 miles at 25 miles/h (40 km/h), on a two-hour charge
from a standard electrical socket. That’s 110 km for 3 kWh, or 2.75 kWh
per 100 km. It has a maximum speed of 62 mph (100 km/h). It weighs 210
kg and has a peak power of 20 kW. www.vectrix.com The “Oxygen Cargo” is
a smaller scooter. It weighs 121 kg, has a 38 mile range, and takes 2–3
hours to charge. Peak power: 3.5 kW; maximum speed 28 mph. It has two
lithium-ion batteries and regenerative brakes. The range can be extended
by adding extra batteries, which store about 1.2 kWh and weigh 15 kg
each. Energy consumption: 4 kWh per 100 km.

![](figure171.png)

Figure 20.42. The TREV. 6 kWh per 100 km. Photo from www.unisa.edu.au.

![](figure172.png)

Figure 20.43. Toyota RAV4 EV. Photo by Kenneth Adelman,
www.solarwarrior.com.

![](figure173.png)

Figure 20.44. Vectrix: 2.75 kWh per 100 km. Photo from www.vectrix.com.

129*the energy-density of compressed-air energy-stores is only about
11–28Wh per kg*. The theoretical limit, assuming perfect isothermal
compression: if 1 m^3^ of ambient air is slowly compressed into a
5-litre container at 200 bar, the potential energy stored is 0.16 kWh in
1.2 kg of air. In practice, a 5-litre container appropriate for this
sort of pressure weighs about 7.5 kg if made from steel or 2 kg using
kevlar or carbon fibre, and the overall energy density achieved would be
about 11–28 Wh per kg. The theoretical energy density is the same,
whatever the volume of the container.

130*Arnold Schwarzenegger ... filling up a hydrogen-powered Hummer*.
*Nature* 438, 24 November 2005. I’m not saying that hydrogen will
*never* be useful for transportation; but I would hope that such a
distinguished journal as *Nature* would address the hydrogen bandwagon
with some critical thought, not only euphoria.

> Hydrogen and fuel cells are not the way to go. The decision by the
> Bush administration and the State of California to follow the hydrogen
> highway is the single worst decision of the past few years.
>
> James Woolsey, Chairman of the Advisory Board of the US Clean Fuels
> Foundation, 27th November 2007.

In September 2008, *The Economist* wrote “Almost nobody disputes that
... eventually most cars will be powered by batteries alone.” On the
other hand, to hear more from advocates of hydrogen-based transport, see
the Rocky Mountain Institute’s pages about the “HyperCar”
www.rmi.org/hypercar/.

–*In the Clean Urban Transport for Europe project the overall energy
required to power the hydrogen buses was between 80% and 200% greater
than that of the baseline diesel bus*. Source: CUTE (2006); Binder et
al. (2006).

–*Fuelling the hydrogen-powered car made by BMW requires three times
more energy than an average car*. Half of the boot of the BMW “Hydrogen
7” car is taken up by its 170-litre hydrogen tank, which holds 8 kg of
hydrogen, giving a range of 200 km on hydrogen
[news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/business/6154212.stm]. The calorific value of
hydrogen is 39 kWh per kg, and the best-practice energy cost of making
hydrogen is 63 kWh per kg (made up of 52 kWh of natural gas and 11 kWh
of electricity) (CUTE, 2006). So filling up the 8 kg tank has an energy
cost of at least 508 kWh; and if that tank indeed delivers 200 km, then
the energy cost is 254 kWh per 100 km.

> The Hydrogen 7 and its hydrogen-fuel-cell cousins are, in many ways,
> simply flashy distractions.
>
> David Talbot, MIT Technology Review
> www.technologyreview.com/Energy/18301/

*Honda’s fuel-cell car, the FCX Clarity*, weighs 1625 kg, stores 4.1 kg
of hydrogen at a pressure of 345 bar, and is said to have a range of 280
miles, consuming 57 miles of road per kg of hydrogen (91 km per kg) in a
standard mix of driving conditions [czjjo], [5a3ryx]. Using the cost for
creating hydrogen mentioned above, assuming natural gas is used as the
main energy source, this car has a transport cost of 69 kWh per 100 km.

> Honda might be able to kid journalists into thinking that hydrogen
> cars are “zero emission” but unfortunately they can’t fool the
> climate.
>
> Merrick Godhaven

132*A lithium-ion battery is 3% lithium*. Source: Fisher et al. (2006).

–*Lithium specialist R. Keith Evans says “concerns regarding lithium
availability ... are unfounded*.” – Evans (2008).

133*Two Dutch-built liners known as “The Economy Twins*.”
www.ssmaritime.com/rijndam-maasdam.htm. QE2: www.qe2.org.uk.

134*Transrapid magnetic levitation train*. www.transrapid.de.

21   Smarter heating {.darkblue}
====================

In the last chapter, we learned that electrification could shrink
transport’s energy consumption to one fifth of its current levels; and
that public trans- port and cycling can be about 40 times more
energy-efficient than car- driving. How about heating? What sort of
energy-savings can technology or lifestyle-change offer?

The power used to heat a building is given by multiplying together three
quantities:

power used

=

average temperature difference × leakiness of building

efficiency of heating system

Let me explain this formula (which is discussed in detail in Chapter E)
with an example. My house is a three-bedroom semi-detached house built
about 1940 (figure 21.1). The average temperature difference between the
inside and outside of the house depends on the setting of the thermostat
and on the weather. If the thermostat is permanently at 20 °C, the
average temperature difference might be 9 °C. The *leakiness* of the
building describes how quickly heat gets out through walls, windows, and
cracks, in response to a temperature difference. The leakiness is
sometimes called the *heat-loss coefficient* of the building. It is
measured in kWh per day per degree of temperature difference. In Chapter
E, I calculate that the leakiness of my house in 2006 was 7.7 kWh/d/°C.
The product

average temperature difference × leakiness of building

is the rate at which heat flows out of the house by conduction and
ventilation. For example, if the average temperature difference is 9 °C
then the heat loss is

9 °C × 7.7 kWh/d/°C ≅ 70 kWh/d.

Finally, to calculate the power required, we divide this heat loss by
the efficiency of the heating system. In my house, the condensing gas
boiler has an efficiency of 90%, so we find:

power used

=

9 °C × 7.7 kWh/d/°C

=

77 kWh/d.

0.9

That’s bigger than the space-heating requirement we estimated in Chapter
7. It’s bigger for two reasons: first, this formula assumes that all the
heat is supplied by the boiler, whereas in fact some heat is supplied by
incidental heat gains from occupants, gadgets, and the sun; second, in
Chapter 7 we assumed that a person kept just two rooms at 20 °C all the
time; keeping an entire house at this temperature all the time would
require more.

OK, how can we reduce the power used by heating? Well, obviously, there
are three lines of attack.

![](figure174.png)

Figure 21.1. My house.

1.  Reduce the average temperature difference. This can be achieved by
    turning thermostats down (or, if you have friends in high places, by
    changing the weather).
2.  Reduce the leakiness of the building. This can be done by improving
    the building’s insulation – think triple glazing, draught-proofing,
    and fluffy blankets in the loft – or, more radically, by demolishing
    the building and replacing it with a better insulated building; or
    perhaps by living in a building of smaller size per person.
    (Leakiness tends to be bigger, the larger a building’s floor area,
    because the areas of external wall, window, and roof tend to be
    bigger too.)
3.  Increase the efficiency of the heating system. You might think that
    90% sounds hard to beat, but actually we can do much better.

Cool technology: the thermostat
-------------------------------

The thermostat (accompanied by woolly jumpers) is hard to beat, when it
comes to value-for-money technology. You turn it down, and your building
uses less energy. Magic! In Britain, for every degree that you turn the
thermostat down, the heat loss decreases by about 10%. Turning the ther-
mostat down from 20 °C to 15 °C would nearly halve the heat loss. Thanks
to incidental heat gains by the building, the savings in heating power
will be even bigger than these reductions in heat loss.

Unfortunately, however, this remarkable energy-saving technology has
side-effects. Some humans call turning the thermostat down a lifestyle
change, and are not happy with it. I’ll make some suggestions later
about how to sidestep this lifestyle issue. Meanwhile, as proof that
“the most important smart component in a building with smart heating is
the occupant,” figure 21.2 shows data from a Carbon Trust study,
observing the heat consumption in twelve identical modern houses. This
study permits us to gawp at the family at number 1, whose heat
consumption is twice as big as that of Mr. and Mrs. Woolly at number 12.
However, we should pay attention to the numbers: the family at number 1
are using 43 kWh per day. But if this is shocking, hang on – a moment
ago, didn’t I estimate that *my* house might use more than that? Indeed,
my average gas consumption from 1993 to 2003 was a little more than 43
kWh per day (fi- gure 7.10, p53), and I thought I was a frugal person!
The problem is the *house*. All the modern houses in the Carbon Trust
study had a leakiness of 2.7 kWh/d/°C, but my house had a leakiness of
7.7 kWh/d/°C! People who live in leaky houses...

The war on leakiness
--------------------

What can be done with leaky old houses, apart from calling in the bull-
dozers? Figure 21.3 shows estimates of the space heating required in old

![](figure175.png)

Figure 21.2. Actual heat consumption in 12 identical houses with
identical heating systems. All houses had floor area 86 m^2^ and were
designed to have a leakiness of 2.7 kWh/d/°C. Source: Carbon Trust
(2007).

![](figure176.png)

detached, semi-detached, and terraced houses as progressively more
effort is put into patching them up. Adding loft insulation and
cavity-wall insul- ation reduces heat loss in a typical old house by
about 25%. Thanks to incidental heat gains, this 25% reduction in heat
loss translates into roughly a 40% reduction in heating consumption.

Let’s put these ideas to the test.

A case study
------------

I introduced you to my house on page 53. Let’s pick up the story. In
2004 I had a condensing boiler installed, replacing the old gas boiler.
(Condensing boilers use a heat-exchanger to transfer heat from the
exhaust gases to incoming air.) At the same time I removed the house’s
hot-water tank (so hot water is now made only on demand), and I put
thermostats on all the bedroom radiators. Along with the new condensing
boiler came a

Figure 21.3. Estimates of the space heating required in a range of UK
houses. From Eden and Bending (1985).

book titles,” and you’ll have bright lights on all the time. But that
question presumes that we have to fix the light level; and we don’t have
to. We can fit light switches that the reader can turn on, and that
switch themselves off again after an appropriate time. Similarly,
thermostats don’t need to be left up at 20 °C all the time.

Before leaving the topic of thermostat settings, I should mention air-
conditioning. Doesn’t it drive you crazy to go into a building in summer
where the thermostat of the air-conditioning is set to 18 °C? These
loony building managers are subjecting everyone to temperatures that in
winter- time they would whinge are too cold! In Japan, the government’s
“Cool- Biz” guidelines recommend that air-conditioning be set to 28 °C
(82 F).

Better buildings
----------------

If you get the chance to build a new building then there are lots of
ways to ensure its heating consumption is much smaller than that of an
old building. Figure 21.2 gave evidence that modern houses are built to
much better insulation standards than those of the 1940s. But the
building standards in Britain could be still better, as Chapter E
discusses. The three key ideas for the best results are: (1) have really
thick insulation in floors, walls, and roofs; (2) ensure the building is
completely sealed and use active ventilation to introduce fresh air and
remove stale and humid air, with heat exchangers passively recovering
much of the heat from the removed air; (3) design the building to
exploit sunshine as much as possible.

The energy cost of heat
-----------------------

So far, this chapter has focused on temperature control and leakiness.
Now we turn to the third factor in the equation:

power used

=

average temperature difference × leakiness of building

efficiency of heating system

How efficiently can heat be produced? Can we obtain heat on the cheap?
Today, building-heating in Britain is primarily delivered by burning a
fossil fuel, natural gas, in boilers with efficiencies of 78%–90%. Can
we get off fossil fuels at the same time as making building-heating more
efficient?

One technology that is held up as an answer to Britain’s heating problem
is called “combined heat and power” (CHP), or its cousin, “micro- CHP.”
I will explain combined heat and power now, but I’ve come to the
conclusion that it’s a bad idea, because there’s a better technology for
heat- ing, called heat pumps, which I’ll describe in a few pages.

![](figure184.png)

Figure 21.7. Eggborough. Not a power station participating in smart
heating.

![](figure180.png)

### Combined heat and power

The standard view of conventional big centralised power stations is that
they are terribly inefficient, chucking heat willy-nilly up chimneys and
cooling towers. A more sophisticated view recognizes that to turn
thermal energy into electricity, we inevitably have to dump heat in a
cold place (figure 21.8). That is how heat engines work. There *has* to
be a cold place. But surely, it’s argued, we could use *buildings* as
the dumping place for this “waste” heat instead of cooling towers or sea
water? This idea is called “combined heat and power” (CHP) or
cogeneration, and it’s been widely used in continental Europe for
decades – in many cities, a big power station is integrated with a
district heating system. Proponents of the modern incarnation of
combined heat and power, “micro-CHP,” suggest that tiny power stations
should be created within single buildings or small collections of
buildings, delivering heat and electricity to those buildings, and
exporting some electricity to the grid.

![](figure181.png)

There’s certainly some truth in the view that Britain is rather backward
when it comes to district heating and combined heat and power, but dis-
cussion is hampered by a general lack of numbers, and by two particular
errors. First, when comparing different ways of using fuel, the wrong
mea- sure of “efficiency” is used, namely one that weights electricity
as having equal value to heat. The truth is, electricity is more
valuable than heat. Second, it’s widely assumed that the “waste” heat in
a traditional power

Figure 21.8. How a power station works. There has to be a cold place to
condense the steam to make the turbine go round. The cold place is
usually a cooling tower or river.

Figure 21.9. Combined heat and power. District heating absorbs heat that
would have been chucked up a cooling tower.

![](figure182.png)

station could be captured for a useful purpose *without impairing the
power station’s electricity production*. This sadly is not true, as the
numbers will show. Delivering useful heat to a customer always reduces
the electricity produced to some degree. The true net gains from
combined heat and power are often much smaller than the hype would lead
you to believe.

A final impediment to rational discussion of combined heat and power is
a myth that has grown up recently, that decentralizing a technology
somehow makes it greener. So whereas big centralized fossil fuel power
stations are “bad,” flocks of local micro-power stations are imbued with
goodness. But if decentralization is actually a good idea then “small is
beautiful” should be evident in the numbers. Decentralization should be
able to stand on its own two feet. And what the numbers actually show is
that *centralized* electricity generation has many benefits in both
economic and energy terms. Only in large buildings is there any benefit
to local generation, and usually that benefit is only about 10% or 20%.

The government has a target for growth of combined heat and power to 10
GW of electrical capacity by 2010, but I think that growth of gas-
powered combined heat and power would be a mistake. Such combined heat
and power is not green: it uses fossil fuel, and it locks us into
continued use of fossil fuel. Given that heat pumps are a better
technology, I believe we should leapfrog over gas-powered combined heat
and power and go directly for heat pumps.

### Heat pumps

Like district heating and combined heat and power, heat pumps are
already widely used in continental Europe, but strangely rare in
Britain. Heat pumps are back-to-front refrigerators. Feel the back of
your refrigerator: it’s *warm*. A refrigerator moves heat from one place
(its inside) to

Figure 21.10. Heat pumps.

another (its back panel). So one way to heat a building is to turn a
refrig- erator inside-out – put the *inside* of the refrigerator in the
garden, thus cooling the garden down; and leave the back panel of the
refrigerator in your kitchen, thus warming the house up. What isn’t
obvious about this whacky idea is that it is a really efficient way to
warm your house. For every kilowatt of power drawn from the electricity
grid, the back-to-front refrigerator can pump three kilowatts of heat
from the garden, so that a total of four kilowatts of heat gets into
your house. So heat pumps are roughly four times as efficient as a
standard electrical bar-fire. Whereas the bar-fire’s efficiency is 100%,
the heat pump’s is 400%. The efficiency of a heat pump is usually called
its *coefficient of performance* or CoP. If the efficiency is 400%, the
coefficient of performance is 4.

Heat pumps can be configured in various ways (figure 21.10). A heat pump
can cool down the *air* in your garden using a heat-exchanger (typ-
ically a 1-metre tall white box, figure 21.11), in which case it’s
called an air-source heat pump. Alternatively, the pump may cool down
the *ground* using big loops of underground plumbing (many tens of
metres long), in which case it’s called a ground-source heat pump. Heat
can also be pumped from rivers and lakes.

Some heat pumps can pump heat in either direction. When an airsource
heat pump runs in reverse, it uses electricity to warm up the *outside*
air and cool down the air *inside* your building. This is called
air-condition- ing. Many air-conditioners are indeed heat-pumps working
in precisely this way. Ground-source heat pumps can also work as
air-con- ditioners. So a single piece of hardware can be used to provide
winter heating and summer cooling.

People sometimes say that ground-source heat pumps use “geothermal
energy,” but that’s not the right name. As we saw in Chapter 16,
geothermal energy offers only a tiny trickle of power per unit area
(about 50 mW/m^2^), in most parts of the world; heat pumps have nothing
to do with this trickle, and they can be used both for heating and for
cooling. Heat pumps simply use the ground as a place to suck heat from,
or to dump heat into. When they steadily suck heat, that heat is
actually being replenished by warmth from the sun.

There’s two things left to do in this chapter. We need to compare heat
pumps with combined heat and power. Then we need to discuss what are the
limits to ground-source heat pumps.

### Heat pumps, compared with combined heat and power

I used to think that combined heat and power was a no-brainer.
“Obviously, we should use the discarded heat from power stations to heat
buildings rather than just chucking it up a cooling tower!” However,
looking carefully at the numbers describing the performance of real CHP
systems, I’ve come to the conclusion that there are better ways of
providing electric

![](figure185.png)

Figure 21.11. The inner and outer bits of an air-source heat pump that
has a coefficient of performance of 4. The inner bit is accompanied by a
ball-point pen, for scale. One of these Fujitsu units can deliver 3.6 kW
of heating when using just 0.845 kW of electricity. It can also run in
reverse, delivering 2.6 kW of cooling when using 0.655 kW of
electricity.

formance of 3 or 4, assuming that the extra electricity for the heat
pumps is generated by an average gas power station or by a
top-of-the-line gas power station, and allowing for 8% loss in the
national electricity network between the power station and the building
where the heat pumps pump heat. The top-of-the-line gas power station’s
efficiency is 53%, assuming it’s running optimally. (I imagine the
Carbon Trust and Nimbus made a similar assumption when providing the
numbers used in this diagram for CHP systems.) In the future, heat pumps
will probably get even better than I assumed here. In Japan, thanks to
strong legislation favouring effi- ciency improvements, heat pumps are
now available with a coefficient of performance of 4.9.

Notice that heat pumps offer a system that can be “better than 100%-
efficient.” For example the “best gas” power station, feeding
electricity to heat pumps can deliver a combination of 30%-efficient
electricity and 80%- efficient heat, a “total efficiency” of 110%. No
plain CHP system could ever match this performance.

Let me spell this out. Heat pumps are superior in efficiency to condens-
ing boilers, even if the heat pumps are powered by electricity from a
power station burning natural gas. If you want to heat lots of buildings
using natural gas, you could install condensing boilers, which are “90%
ef- ficient,” or you could send the same gas to a new gas power station
making electricity and install electricity-powered heat pumps in all the
buildings; the second solution’s efficiency would be somewhere between
140% and 185%. It’s not necessary to dig big holes in the garden and
install underfloor heating to get the benefits of heat pumps; the best
air-source heat pumps (which require just a small external box, like an
air-conditioner’s) can deliver hot water to normal radiators with a
coefficient of performance above 3. The air-source heat pump in figure
21.11 (p147) directly delivers warm air to an office.

I thus conclude that combined heat and power, even though it sounds a
good idea, is probably not the best way to heat buildings and make
electricity using natural gas, assuming that air-source or ground-source
heat pumps can be installed in the buildings. The heat-pump solution has
further advantages that should be emphasized: heat pumps can be located
in any buildings where there is an electricity supply; they can be
driven by any electricity source, so they keep on working when the gas
runs out or the gas price goes through the roof; and heat pumps are
flexible: they can be turned on and off to suit the demand of the
building occupants.

I emphasize that this critical comparison does not mean that CHP is
always a bad idea. What I’m comparing here are methods for heating
ordinary buildings, which requires only very low-grade heat. CHP can
also be used to deliver higher-grade heat to industrial users (at 200
°C, for example). In such industrial settings, heat pumps are unlikely
to compete so well because their coefficient of performance would be
lower.

![](figure183.png)

### Limits to growth (of heat pumps)

Because the temperature of the ground, a few metres down, stays
sluggishly close to 11 °C, whether it’s summer or winter, the ground is
theoretically a better place for a heat pump to grab its heat than the
air, which in midwinter may be 10 or 15 °C colder than the ground. So
heat-pump advisors encourage the choice of ground-source over air-source
heat pumps, where possible. (Heat pumps work less efficiently when
there’s a big temperature difference between the inside and outside.)

However, the ground is not a limitless source of heat. The heat has to
come from somewhere, and ground is not a very good thermal conductor. If
we suck heat too fast from the ground, the ground will become as cold as
ice, and the advantage of the ground-source heat pump will be
diminished.

In Britain, the main purpose of heat pumps would be to get heat into
buildings in the winter. The ultimate source of this heat is the sun,
which replenishes heat in the ground by direct radiation and by
conduction through the air. The rate at which heat is sucked from the
ground must satisfy two constraints: it must not cause the ground’s
temperature to drop too low during the winter; and the heat sucked in
the winter must be replenished somehow during the summer. If there’s any
risk that the *natural* trickling of heat in the summer won’t make up
for the heat removed in the winter, then the replenishment must be
driven *actively* – for example by running the system in reverse in
summer, putting heat down into the ground (and thus providing
air-conditioning up top).

Let’s put some numbers into this discussion. How big a piece of ground
does a ground-source heat pump need? Assume that we have a neighbourhood
with quite a high population density – say 6200 people per km^2^ (160
m^2^ per person), the density of a typical British suburb. Can
*everyone* use ground-source heat pumps, without using active summer
replenishment? A calculation in Chapter E (p303) gives a tentative
answer of *no*: if we wanted everyone in the neighbourhood to be able to
pull from the ground a heat flow of about 48 kWh/d per person (my
estimate of our typical winter heat demand), we’d end up freezing the
ground in the winter. Avoiding unreasonable cooling of the ground
requires that the sucking rate be less than 12 kWh/d per person. So if
we switch to ground-source heat pumps, we should plan to include
substantial summer heat-dumping in the design, so as to refill the
ground with heat for use in the winter. This summer heat-dumping could
use heat from air-conditioning, or heat from

Figure 21.12. How close together can ground-source heat pumps be packed?

area per person (m^2^)

Bangalore

37

Manhattan

39

Paris

40

Chelsea

66

Tokyo

72

Moscow

97

Taipei

104

The Hague

152

San Francisco

156

Singapore

156

Cambridge MA

164

Sydney

174

Portsmouth

213

Table 21.13. Some urban areas per person.

roof-mounted solar water-heating panels. (Summer solar heat is stored in
the ground for subsequent use in winter by Drake Landing Solar Com-
munity in Canada [www.dlsc.ca].) Alternatively, we should expect to need
to use some air-source heat pumps too, and then we’ll be able to get all
the heat we want – as long as we have the electricity to pump it. In the
UK, air temperatures don’t go very far below freezing, so concerns about
poor winter-time performance of air-source pumps, which might apply in
North America and Scandanavia, probably do not apply in Britain.

My conclusion: can we reduce the energy we consume for heating? Yes. Can
we get off fossil fuels at the same time? Yes. Not forgetting the
low-hanging fruit – building-insulation and thermostat shenanigans – we
should replace all our fossil-fuel heaters with electric-powered heat
pumps; we can reduce the energy required to 25% of today’s levels. Of
course this plan for electrification would require more electricity. But
even if the extra electricity came from gas-fired power stations, that
would still be a much better way to get heating than what we do today,
simply setting fire to the gas. Heat pumps are future-proof, allowing us
to heat buildings efficiently with electricity from any source.

Nay-sayers object that the coefficient of performance of air-source heat
pumps is lousy – just 2 or 3. But their information is out of date. If
we are careful to buy top-of-the-line heat pumps, we can do much better.
The Japanese government legislated a decade-long efficiency drive that
has greatly improved the performance of air-conditioners; thanks to this
drive, there are now air-source heat pumps with a coefficient of
performance of 4.9; these heat pumps can make hot water as well as hot
air.

Another objection to heat pumps is “oh, we can’t approve of people
fitting efficient air-source heaters, because they might use them for
air- conditioning in the summer.” Come on – I hate gratuitous
air-conditioning as much as anyone, but these heat pumps are four times
more efficient than any other winter heating method! Show me a better
choice. Wood pellets? Sure, a few wood-scavengers can burn wood. But
there is not enough wood for everyone to do so. For forest-dwellers,
there’s wood. For everyone else, there’s heat pumps.

Notes and further reading
-------------------------

page no.

142*Loft and cavity insulation reduces heat loss in a typical old house
by about a quarter*. Eden and Bending (1985).

143*The average internal temperature in British houses in 1970 was 13
°C!* Source: Dept. of Trade and Industry (2002a, para 3.11)

145*Britain is rather backward when it comes to district heating and
combined heat and power*. The rejected heat from UK power stations could
meet the

![](figure331.png)

heating needs of the entire country (Wood, 1985). In Denmark in 1985,
district heating systems supplied 42% of space heating, with heat being
transmitted 20 km or more in hot pressurized water. In West Germany in
1985, 4 million dwellings received 7 kW per dwelling from district
heating. Two thirds of the heat supplied was from power stations. In
Vasteras, Sweden in 1985, 98% of the city’s heat was supplied from power
stations.

147*Heat pumps are roughly four times as efficient as a standard
electrical barfire*. See www.gshp.org.uk. Some heat pumps available in
the UK already have a coefficient of peformance bigger than 4.0
[yok2nw]. Indeed there is a government subsidy for water-source heat
pumps that applies only to pumps with a coefficient of peformance better
than 4.4 [2dtx8z]. Commercial ground-source heat pumps are available
with a coefficient of performance of 5.4 for cooling and 4.9 for heating
[2fd8ar].

153*Air-source heat pumps with a coefficient of performance of 4.9...*
According to HPTCJ (2007), heat pumps with a coefficient of performance
of 6.6 have been available in Japan since 2006. The performance of heat
pumps in Japan improved from 3 to 6 within a decade thanks to government
regulations. HPTCJ (2007) describe an air-source-heat-pump water-heater
called Eco Cute with a coefficient of performance of 4.9. The Eco Cute
came on the market in 2001. www.ecosystem-japan.com.

Further reading on heat pumps: European Heat Pump Network

ehpn.fiz-karlsruhe.de/en/, www.kensaengineering.com, www.heatking.co.uk,
www.iceenergy.co.uk.

![](figure186.png)

Figure 21.14. Advertisement from the Mayor of London’s “DIY planet
repairs” campaign of 2007. The text reads “**Turn down**. If every
London household turned down their thermostat by one degree, we could
save 837 000 tons of CO~2~ and £110m per year.” [london.gov.uk/diy]
Expressed in savings per person, that’s 0.12 t CO~2~ per year per
person. That’s about 1% of one person’s total (11 t), so this is good
advice. Well done, Ken!

22   Efficient electricity use {.darkblue}
==============================

Can we cut electricity use? Yes, switching off gadgets when they’re not
in use is an easy way to make a difference. Energy-efficient light bulbs
will save you electricity too.

We already examined gadgets in Chapter 11. Some gadgets are unim-
portant, but some are astonishing guzzlers. The laser-printer in my
office, sitting there doing nothing, is slurping 17 W – nearly 0.5 kWh
per day! A friend bought a lamp from IKEA. Its awful adaptor (figure
22.1) guzzles 10 W (0.25 kWh per day) whether or not the lamp is on. If
you add up a few stereos, DVD players, cable modems, and wireless
devices, you may even find that half of your home electricity
consumption can be saved.

According to the International Energy Agency, standby power con-
sumption accounts for roughly 8% of residential electricity demand. In
the UK and France, the average standby power is about 0.75 kWh/d per
household. The problem isn’t standby itself – it’s the shoddy way in
which standby is implemented. It’s perfectly possible to make standby
systems that draw less than 0.01 W; but manufacturers, saving themselves
a penny in the manufacturing costs, are saddling the consumer with an
annual cost of pounds.

![](figure187.png)

A vampire-killing experiment
----------------------------

Figure 22.2 shows an experiment I did at home. First, for two days, I
mea- sured the power consumption when I was out or asleep. Then,
switching

![](figure188.png)

Figure 22.1. An awful AC lamp-adaptor from IKEA – the adaptor uses
nearly 10 W even when the lamp is switched off!

Figure 22.2. Efficiency in the offing. I measured the electricity
savings from switching off vampires during a week when I was away at
work most of each day, so both days and nights were almost devoid of
useful activity, except for the fridge. The brief little blips of
consumption are caused by the microwave, toaster, washing machine, or
vacuum cleaner. On the Tuesday I switched off most of my vampires: two
stereos, a DVD player, a cable modem, a wireless router, and an
answering machine. The red line shows the trend of “nobody-at-home”
consumption before, and the green line shows the “nobody-at-home”
consumption after this change. Consumption fell by 45 W, or 1.1 kWh per
day.

23   Sustainable fossil fuels? {.green}
==============================

> It is an inescapable reality that fossil fuels will continue to be an
> important part of the energy mix for decades to come.
>
> UK government spokesperson, April 2008

> Our present happy progressive condition is a thing of limited
> duration.
>
> William Stanley Jevons, 1865

We explored in the last three chapters the main technologies and
lifestyle changes for reducing power consumption. We found that we could
halve the power consumption of transport (and de-fossilize it) by
switching to electric vehicles. We found that we could shrink the power
consumption of heating even more (and de-fossilize it) by insulating all
buildings better and using electric heat pumps instead of fossil fuels.
So yes, we can reduce consumption. But still, matching even this reduced
consumption with power from Britain’s own renewables looks very
challenging (figure 18.7, p109). It’s time to discuss non-renewable
options for power produc- tion.

Take the known reserves of fossil fuels, which are overwhelmingly coal:
1600 Gt of coal. Share them equally between six billion people, and burn
them “sustainably.” What do we mean if we talk about using up a finite
resource “sustainably”? Here’s the arbitrary definition I’ll use: the
burn-rate is “sustainable” if the resources would last 1000 years. A ton
of coal delivers 8000 kWh of chemical energy, so 1600 Gt of coal shared
be- tween 6 billion people over 1000 years works out to a power of 6 kWh
per day per person. A standard coal power station would turn this
chemical power into electricity with an efficiency of about 37% – that
means about 2.2 kWh(e) per day per person. If we care about the climate,
however, then presumably we would not use a standard power station.
Rather, we would go for “clean coal,” also known as “coal with carbon
capture and storage” – an as-yet scarcely-implemented technology that
sucks most of the carbon dioxide out of the chimney-flue gases and then
shoves it down a hole in the ground. Cleaning up power station emissions
in this way has a significant energy cost – it would reduce the
delivered electricity by about 25%. So a “sustainable” use of known coal
reserves would deliver only about 1.6 kWh(e) per day per person.

We can compare this “sustainable” coal-burning rate – 1.6 Gt per year –
with the current global rate of coal consumption: 6.3 Gt per year, and
rising.

What about the UK alone? Britain is estimated to have 7 Gt of coal left.
OK, if we share 7 Gt between 60 million people, we get 100 tons per
person. If we want a 1000-year solution, this corresponds to 2.5 kWh per

![](figure190.png)

Figure 23.1. Coal being delivered to Kingsnorth power station (capacity
1940 MW) in 2005. Photos by Ian Boyle www.simplonpc.co.uk.

![](figure191.png)

Figure 23.2. “Sustainable fossil fuels.”

day per person. In a power station performing carbon capture and
storage, this sustainable approach to UK coal would yield 0.7 kWh(e) per
day per person.

Our conclusion is clear:

> Clean coal is only a stop-gap.

If we do develop “clean coal” technology in order to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions, we must be careful, while patting ourselves on the back,
to do the accounting honestly. The coal-burning process releases
greenhouse gases not only at the power station but also at the coal
mine. Coal-mining tends to release methane, carbon monoxide, and carbon
dioxide, both di- rectly from the coal seams as they are exposed, and
subsequently from discarded shales and mudstones; for an ordinary coal
power station, these coal-mine emissions bump up the greenhouse gas
footprint by about 2%, so for a “clean” coal power station, these
emissions may have some impact on the accounts. There’s a similar
accounting problem with natural gas: if, say, 5% of the natural gas
leaks out along the journey from hole in the ground to power station,
then this accidental methane pollution is equiva- lent (in greenhouse
effect) to a 40% boost in the carbon dioxide released at the power
station.

New coal technologies
---------------------

Stanford-based company directcarbon.com are developing the *Direct Car-
bon Fuel Cell*, which converts fuel and air directly to electricity and
CO~2~, without involving any water or steam turbines. They claim that
this way of generating electricity from coal is twice as efficient as
the standard power station.

When’s the end of business as usual?
------------------------------------

The economist Jevons did a simple calculation in 1865. People were dis-
cussing how long British coal would last. They tended to answer this
question by dividing the estimated coal remaining by the rate of coal
consumption, getting answers like “1000 years.” But, Jevons said,
consumption is *not* constant. It’s been doubling every 20 years, and
“progress” would have it continue to do so. So “reserves divided by
consumption-rate” gives the wrong answer.

Instead, Jevons extrapolated the exponentially-growing consumption,
calculating the time by which the total amount consumed would exceed the
estimated reserves. This was a much shorter time. Jevons was not
assuming that consumption would actually continue to grow at the same
rate; rather he was making the point that growth was not sustainable.
His calculation estimated for his British readership the inevitable
limits

![](figure425.png)

Figure 23.3. A caterpillar grazing on old leaves. Photo by Peter Gunn.

24   Nuclear? {.green}
=============

> We made the mistake of lumping nuclear energy in with nuclear weapons,
> as if all things nuclear were evil. I think that’s as big a mistake as
> if you lumped nuclear medicine in with nuclear weapons.
>
> Patrick Moore, former Director of Greenpeace International

Nuclear power comes in two flavours. Nuclear *fission* is the flavour
that we know how to use in power stations; fission uses uranium, an
exceptionally heavy element, as fuel. Nuclear *fusion* is the flavour
that we don’t yet know how to implement in power stations; fusion would
use light elements, especially hydrogen, as its fuel. Fission reactions
split up heavy nuclei into medium-sized nuclei, releasing energy. Fusion
reactions fuse light nuclei into medium-sized nuclei, releasing energy.

Both forms of nuclear power, fission and fusion, have an important
property: the nuclear energy available per atom is roughly one million
times bigger than the chemical energy per atom of typical fuels. This
means that the amounts of fuel and waste that must be dealt with at a
nuclear reactor can be up to one million times smaller than the amounts
of fuel and waste at an equivalent fossil-fuel power station.

Let’s try to personalize these ideas. The mass of the fossil fuels con-
sumed by “the average British person” is about 16 kg per day (4 kg of
coal, 4 kg of oil, and 8 kg of gas). That means that every single day,
an amount of fossil fuels with the same weight as 28 pints of milk is
extracted from a hole in the ground, transported, processed, and burned
somewhere on your behalf. The average Brit’s fossil fuel habit creates
11 tons per year of waste carbon dioxide; that’s 30 kg per day. In the
previous chapter we raised the idea of capturing waste carbon dioxide,
compressing it into solid or liquid form, and transporting it somewhere
for disposal. Imagine that one person was responsible for capturing and
dealing with all their own carbon dioxide waste. 30 kg per day of carbon
dioxide is a substantial rucksack-full every day – the same weight as 53
pints of milk!

In contrast, the amount of natural uranium required to provide the same
amount of energy as 16 kg of fossil fuels, in a standard fission
reactor, is 2 grams; and the resulting waste weighs one quarter of a
gram. (This 2 g of uranium is not as small as one millionth of 16 kg per
day, by the way, because today’s reactors burn up less than 1% of the
uranium.) To deliver 2 grams of uranium per day, the miners at the
uranium mine would have to deal with perhaps 200 g of ore per day.

So the material streams flowing into and out of nuclear reactors are
small, relative to fossil-fuel streams. “Small is beautiful,” but the
fact that the nuclear waste stream is small doesn’t mean that it’s not a
problem; it’s just a “beautifully small” problem.

![](figure192.png)

Figure 24.1. Electricity generated per capita from nuclear fission in
2007, in kWh per day per person, in each of the countries with nuclear
power.

“Sustainable” power from nuclear fission
----------------------------------------

Figure 24.1 shows how much electricity was generated globally by nuclear
power in 2007, broken down by country.

Could nuclear power be “sustainable”? Leaving aside for a moment the
usual questions about safety and waste-disposal, a key question is
whether humanity could live for generations on fission. How great are
the world wide supplies of uranium, and other fissionable fuels? Do we
have only a few decades’ worth of uranium, or do we have enough for
millennia?

To estimate a “sustainable” power from uranium, I took the total recov-
erable uranium in the ground and in seawater, divided it fairly between
6 billion humans, and asked “how fast can we use this if it has to last
1000 years?”

Almost all the recoverable uranium is in the oceans, not in the ground:
seawater contains 3.3 mg of uranium per m^3^ of water, which adds up to
4.5 billion tons worldwide. I called the uranium in the ocean
“recoverable” but this is a bit inaccurate – most ocean waters are quite
inaccessible, and the ocean conveyor belt rolls round only once every
1000 years or so; and no-one has yet demonstrated uranium-extraction
from seawater on an in dustrial scale. So we’ll make separate estimates
for two cases: first using only mined uranium, and second using ocean
uranium too.

The uranium ore in the ground that’s extractable at prices below \$130
per kg of uranium is about one thousandth of this. If prices went above
\$130 per kg, phosphate deposits that contain uranium at low concentra-
tions would become economic to mine. Recovery of uranium from phosp-
hates is perfectly possible, and was done in America and Belgium before
1998. For the estimate of mined uranium, I’ll add both the conventional
uranium ore and the phosphates, to give a total resource of 27 million
tons of uranium (table 24.2).

We’ll consider two ways to use uranium in a reactor: (a) the widely-used
*once-through method* gets energy mainly fromthe ^235^U (which makes up
just 0.7% of uranium), and discards the remaining ^238^U; (b) *fast
breeder reactors*, which are more expensive to build, convert the ^238^U
to fission able plutonium-239 and obtain roughly 60 times as much energy
from the uranium.

### Once-through reactors, using uranium from the ground

A once-through **one-gigawatt** nuclear power station uses **162 tons
per year of uranium**. So the known mineable resources of uranium,
shared between 6 billion people, would last for 1000 years if we
produced nuclear power at a rate of 0.55 kWh per day per person. This
sustainable rate is the output of just 136 nuclear power stations, and
is half of today’s nuclear power production. It’s very possible this is
an underestimate of uranium’s poten- tial, since, as there is not yet a
uranium shortage, there is no incentive for

million tons uranium

Australia

1.14

Kazakhstan

0.82

Canada

0.44

USA

0.34

South Africa

0.34

Namibia

0.28

Brazil

0.28

Russian Federation

0.17

Uzbekistan

0.12

World total (conventional reserves in the ground)

4.7

Phosphate deposits

22

Seawater

4500

Table 24.2. Known recoverable resources of uranium. The top part of the
table shows the “reasonable assured resources” and “inferred resources,”
at cost less than \$130 per kg of uranium, as of 1 Jan 2005. These are
the estimated resources in areas where exploration has taken place.
There’s also 1.3 million tons of depleted uranium sitting around in
stockpiles, a by-product of previous uranium activities.

![](figure194.png)

Figure 24.3. Workers push uranium slugs into the X-10 Graphite Reactor.

exploration and little uranium exploration has been undertaken since the
1980s; so maybe more mineable uranium will be discovered. Indeed, one
paper published in 1980 estimated that the low-grade uranium resource is
more than 1000 times greater than the 27 million tons we just assumed.

Could our current once-through use of mined uranium be sustainable? It’s
hard to say, since there is such uncertainty about the result of future
exploration. Certainly at today’s rate of consumption, once-through
reac- tors could keep going for hundreds of years. But if we wanted to
crank up nuclear power 40-fold worldwide, in order to get off fossil
fuels and to al- low standards of living to rise, we might worry that
once-through reactors are not a sustainable technology.

### Fast breeder reactors, using uranium from the ground

Uranium can be used 60 times more efficiently in fast breeder reactors,
which burn up all the uranium – both the ^238^U and the ^235^U (in
contrast to the once-through reactors, which burn mainly ^235^U). As
long as we don’t chuck away the spent fuel that is spat out by
once-through reactors, this source of depleted uranium could be used
too, so uranium that is put in once-through reactors need not be wasted.
If we used all the mineable uranium (plus the depleted uranium
stockpiles) in 60-times-more-efficient fast breeder reactors, the power
would be 33 kWh per day per person. Attitudes to fast breeder reactors
range from “this is a dangerous failed experimental technology whereof
one should not speak” to “we can and should start building breeder
reactors right away.” I am not competent to comment on the risks of
breeder technology, and I don’t want to mix ethical assertions with
factual assertions. My aim is just to help understand the numbers. The
one ethical position I wish to push is “we should have a plan that adds
up.”

### Once-through, using uranium from the oceans

The oceans’ uranium, if completely extracted and used in once-through
reactors, corresponds to a total energy of

4.5 billion tons per planet

 = 28 million GW-years per planet.

162 tons uranium per GW-year

How fast could uranium be extracted from the oceans? The oceans
circulate slowly: half of the water is in the Pacific Ocean, and deep
Pacific waters circulate to the surface on the great ocean conveyor only
every 1600 years. Let’s imagine that 10% of the uranium is extracted
over such a 1600-year period. That’s an extraction rate of 280 000 tons
per year. In once-through reactors, this would deliver power at a rate
of

2.8 million GW-years / 1600 years = 1750 GW,

![](figure195.png)

Figure 24.4. Three Mile Island nuclear power plant.

![](figure196.png)

Figure 24.5. Dounreay Nuclear Power Development Establishment, whose
primary purpose was the development of fast breeder reactor technology.
Photo by John Mullen.

### Using uranium from rivers

The uranium in the oceans is being topped up by rivers, which deliver
uranium at a rate of 32 000 tons per year. If 10% of this influx were
captured, it would provide enough fuel for 20 GW of once-through
reactors, or 1200 GW of fast breeder reactors. The fast breeder reactors
would deliver 5 kWh per day per person.

All these numbers are summarized in figure 24.6.

### What about costs?

As usual in this book, my main calculations have paid little attention
to economics. However, since the potential contribution of
ocean-uranium- based power is one of the biggest in our “sustainable”
production list, it seems appropriate to discuss whether this
uranium-power figure is at all economically plausible.

Japanese researchers have found a technique for extracting uranium from
seawater at a cost of \$100–300 per kilogram of uranium, in compar- ison
with a current cost of about \$20/kg for uranium from ore. Because
uranium contains so much more energy per ton than traditional fuels,
this 5-fold or 15-fold increase in the cost of uranium would have little
effect on the cost of nuclear power: nuclear power’s price is dominated
by the cost of power-station construction and decommissioning, not by
the cost of the fuel. Even a price of \$300/kg would increase the cost
of nuclear energy by only about 0.3 p per kWh. The expense of uranium
extraction could be reduced by combining it with another use of seawater
– for example, power-station cooling.

We’re not home yet: does the Japanese technique scale up? What is the
energy cost of processing all the seawater? In the Japanese experiment,
three cages full of adsorbent uranium-attracting material weighing 350
kg collected “more than 1 kg of yellow cake in 240 days;” this figure
corresponds to about 1.6 kg per year. The cages had a cross-sectional
area of 48 m^2^. To power a once-through 1 GW nuclear power station, we
need 160 000 kg per year, which is a production rate 100 000 times
greater than the Japanese experiment’s. If we simply scaled up the
Japanese technique, which accumulated uranium passively from the sea, a
power of 1 GW would thus need cages having a collecting area of 4.8
km^2^ and containing a weight of 350 000 tons of adsorbent material –
more than the weight of the steel in the reactor itself. To put these
large numbers in human terms, if uranium were delivering, say, 22 kWh
per day per person, each 1 GW reactor would be shared between 1 million
people, each of whom needs 0.16 kg of uranium per year. So each person
would require one tenth of the Japanese experimental facility, with a
weight of 35 kg per person, and an area of 5 m^2^ per person. The
proposal that such uranium-extraction facilities should be created is
thus similar in scale to proposals such as “every person should have 10
m^2^ of solar panels” and “every person should have a

one-ton car and a dedicated parking place for it.” A large investment,
yes, but not absurdly off scale. And that was the calculation for
once-through reactors. For fast breeder reactors, 60 times less uranium
is required, so the mass per person of the uranium collector would be
0.5 kg.

Thorium
-------

Thorium is a radioactive element similar to uranium. Formerly used to
make gas mantles, it is about three times as abundant in the earth’s
crust as uranium. Soil commonly contains around 6 parts per million of
thorium, and some minerals contain 12% thorium oxide. Seawater contains
little thorium, because thorium oxide is insoluble. Thorium can be
completely burned up in simple reactors (in contrast to standard uranium
reactors which use only about 1% of natural uranium). Thorium is used in
nuclear reactors in India. If uranium ore runs low, thorium will
probably become the dominant nuclear fuel.

Thorium reactors deliver 3.6 billion kWh of heat per ton of thorium,
which implies that a 1 GW reactor requires about 6 tons of thorium per
year, assuming its generators are 40% efficient. Worldwide thorium re-
sources are estimated to total about 6 million tons, four times more
than the known reserves shown in table 24.7. As with the uranium
resources, it seems plausible that these thorium resources are an
underestimate, since thorium prospecting is not highly valued today. If
we assume, as with ura- nium, that these resources are used up over 1000
years and shared equally among 6 billion people, we find that the
“sustainable” power thus generated is 4 kWh/d per person.

An alternative nuclear reactor for thorium, the “energy amplifier” or
“accelerator-driven system” proposed by Nobel laureate Carlo Rubbia and
his colleagues would, they estimated, convert 6 million tons of thorium
to 15 000 TWy of energy, or 60 kWh/d per person over 1000 years.
Assuming conversion to electricity at 40% efficiency, this would deliver
24 kWh/d per person for 1000 years. And the waste from the energy
amplifier would be much less radioactive too. They argue that, in due
course, many times more thorium would be economically extractable than
the current 6 million tons. If their suggestion – 300 times more – is
correct, then thorium and the energy amplifier could offer 120 kWh/d per
person for 60 000 years.

Land use
--------

Let’s imagine that Britain decides it is serious about getting off
fossil fuels, and creates a lot of new nuclear reactors, even though
this may not be “sustainable.” If we build enough reactors to make
possible a significant decarbonization of transport and heating, can we
fit the required nuclear reactors into Britain? The number we need to
know is the power

  Country           Reserves (1000 tons)
  ----------------- ----------------------
  Turkey            380
  Australia         300
  India             290
  Norway            170
  USA               160
  Canada            100
  South Africa      35
  Brazil            16
  Other countries   95
  World total       1580

Table 24.7. Known world thorium resources in monazite (economically
extractable).

![](figure197.png)

Figure 24.8. Thorium options.

per unit area of nuclear power stations, which is about 1000W/m^2^
(figure 24.10). Let’s imagine generating 22 kWh per day per person of
nuclear power – equivalent to 55 GW (roughly the same as France’s
nuclear power), which could be delivered by 55 nuclear power stations,
each occu- pying one square kilometre. That’s about 0.02% of the area of
the country. Wind farms delivering the same average power would require
500 times as much land: 10% of the country. If the nuclear power
stations were placed in pairs around the coast (length about 3000 km, at
5 km resolution), then there’d be two every 100 km. Thus while the area
required is modest, the fraction of coastline gobbled by these power
stations would be about 2% (2 kilometres in every 100).

Economics of cleanup
--------------------

What’s the cost of cleaning up nuclear power sites? The nuclear decom-
missioning authority has an annual budget of £2 billion for the next 25
years.[^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#167) The
nuclear industry sold everyone in the UK 4 kWh/d for about 25 years, so
the nuclear decommissioning authority’s cost is 2.3
p/kWh.[^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#167) That’s a
hefty subsidy – though not, it must be said, as hefty as the subsidy
currently given to offshore wind (7 p/kWh).

Safety
------

The safety of nuclear operations in Britain remains a concern. The THORP
reprocessing facility at Sellafield, built in 1994 at a cost of £1.8
billion, had a growing leak from a broken pipe from August 2004 to April
2005. Over eight months, the leak let *85 000 litres* of uranium-rich
fluid flow into a sump which was equipped with safety systems that were
designed to detect immediately any leak of as little as *15 litres*. But
the leak went undetected because the operators hadn’t completed the
checks that ensured the safety systems were working; and the operators
were in the habit of ignoring safety alarms anyway.

The safety system came with belt and braces. Independent of the failed
safety alarms, routine safety-measurements of fluids in the sump should
have detected the abnormal presence of uranium within one month of the
start of the leak; but the operators often didn’t bother taking these
routine measurements, because they felt too busy; and when they *did*
take mea- surements that detected the abnormal presence of uranium in
the sump (on 28 August 2004, 26 November 2004, and 24 February 2005), no
action was taken.

By April 2005, *22 tons* of uranium had leaked, but still none of the
leak-detection systems detected the leak. The leak was finally detected
by *accountancy*, when the bean-counters noticed that they were getting
10% less uranium out than their clients claimed they’d put in! Thank
goodness this private company had a profit motive, hey? The criticism
from the

![](figure198.png)

Figure 24.9. Sizewell’s power stations. Sizewell A, in the foreground,
had a capacity of 420 MW, and was shut down at the end of 2006. Sizewell
B, behind, has a capacity of 1.2 GW. Photo by William Connolley.

![](figure435.png)

Figure 24.10. Sizewell occupies less than 1 km^2^. The blue grid’s
spacing is 1 km. © Crown copyright; Ordnance Survey.

Chief Inspector of Nuclear Installations was withering: “The Plant was
operated in a culture that seemed to allow instruments to operate in
alarm mode rather than questioning the alarm and rectifying the relevant
fault.”

If we let private companies build new reactors, how can we ensure that
higher safety standards are adhered to? I don’t know.

At the same time, we must not let ourselves be swept off our feet in
horror at the danger of nuclear power. Nuclear power is not infinitely
dangerous. It’s just dangerous, much as coal mines, petrol repositories,
fossil-fuel burning and wind turbines are dangerous. Even if we have no
guarantee against nuclear accidents in the future, I think the right way
to assess nuclear is to compare it objectively with other sources of
power. Coal power stations, for example, expose the public to nuclear
radiation, because coal ash typically contains uranium. Indeed,
according to a paper published in the journal *Science*, people in
America living near coal-fired power stations are exposed to higher
radiation doses than those living near nuclear power plants.

When quantifying the public risks of different power sources, we need a
new unit. I’ll go with “deaths per GWy (gigawatt-year).” Let me try to
convey what it would mean if a power source had a death rate of 1 death
per GWy. One gigawatt-year is the energy produced by a 1 GW power
station, if it operates flat-out for one year. Britain’s electricity
consumption is roughly 45 GW, or, if you like, 45 gigawatt-years per
year. So if we got our electricity from sources with a death rate of 1
death per GWy, that would mean the British electricity supply system was
killing 45 people per year. For comparison, 3000 people die per year on
Britain’s roads. So, if you are *not* campaigning for the abolition of
roads, you may deduce that “1 death per GWy” is a death rate that, while
sad, you might be content to live with. Obviously, 0.1 deaths per GWy
would be preferable, but it takes only a moment’s reflection to realize
that, sadly, fossil-fuel energy production must have a cost greater than
0.1 deaths per GWy – just think of disasters on oil rigs; helicopters
lost at sea; pipeline fires; refinery explosions; and coal mine
accidents: there are tens of fossil-chain fatalities per year in
Britain.

So, let’s discuss the actual death rates of a range of electricity
sources. The death rates vary a lot from country to country. In China,
for example, the death rate in coal mines, per ton of coal delivered, is
50 times that of most nations. Figure 24.11 shows numbers from studies
by the Paul Scherrer Institute and by a European Union project called
ExternE, which made comprehensive estimates of all the impacts of energy
production. According to the EU figures, coal, lignite, and oil have the
highest death rates, followed by peat and biomass-power, with death
rates above 1 per GWy. Nuclear and wind are the best, with death rates
below 0.2 per GWy. Hydroelectricity is the best of all according to the
EU study, but comes out worst in the Paul Scherrer Institute’s study,
because the latter surveyed a different set of countries.

![](figure199.png)

Figure 24.11. Death rates of electricity generation technologies. x:
European Union estimates by the ExternE project. O: Paul Scherrer
Institute.

### Inherently safe nuclear power

Spurred on by worries about nuclear accidents, engineers have devised
many new reactors with improved safety features. The GT-MHR power plant,
for example, is claimed to be inherently safe; and, moreover it has a
higher efficiency of conversion of heat to electricity than conventional
nuclear plants [gt-mhr.ga.com].

Mythconceptions
---------------

Two widely-cited defects of nuclear power are construction costs, and
waste. Let’s examine some aspects of these issues.

#### Building a nuclear power station requires huge amounts of con- crete and steel, materials whose creation involves huge CO2 pollution.

The steel and concrete in a 1 GW nuclear power station have a carbon
footprint of roughly 300 000 t CO~2~.

Spreading this “huge” number over a 25-year reactor life we can express
this contribution to the carbon intensity in the standard units (g CO~2~
per kWh(e)),

carbon intensity associated with construction

 = 

300× 10^9^ g

10^6^ kW(e) × 220 000 h

 = 

1.4 g/kWh(e),

which is much smaller than the fossil-fuel benchmark of 400 g
CO~2~/kWh(e). The IPCC estimates that the total carbon intensity of
nuclear power (in- cluding construction, fuel processing, and
decommissioning) is less than 40 g CO~2~/kWh(e) (Sims et al., 2007).

Please don’t get me wrong: I’m not trying to be pro-nuclear. I’m just
pro-arithmetic.

#### Isn’t the waste from nuclear reactors a huge problem?

As we noted in the opening of this chapter, the volume of waste from
nuclear reactors is relatively small. Whereas the ash from ten
coal-fired power stations would have a mass of four million tons per
year (having a volume of roughly 40 litres per person per year), the
nuclear waste from Britain’s ten nuclear power stations has a volume of
just 0.84 litres per person per year – think of that as a bottle of wine
per person per year (figure 24.13).

Most of this waste is low-level waste. 7% is intermediate-level waste,
and just 3% of it – 25 ml per year – is high-level waste.

The high-level waste is the really nasty stuff. It’s conventional to
keep the high-level waste at the reactor for its first 40 years. It is
stored in pools of water and cooled. After 40 years, the level of
radioactivity has dropped 1000-fold. The level of radioactivity
continues to fall; after 1000
years,[^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#169) the

![](figure200.png)

Figure 24.12. Chernobyl power plant (top), and the abandoned town of
Prypiat, which used to serve it (bottom). Photos by Nik Stanbridge.

dard of living, using 125 kWh per day derived from fossil sources, from
nuclear power, or from mined geothermal power. The area of the earth per
person would be 51 000 m^2^. Dividing the power per person by the area
per person, we find that the extra power contributed by human energy use
would be 0.1 W/m^2^. That’s one fortieth of the 4 W/m^2^ that we’re
currently fretting about, and a little smaller than the 0.25 W/m^2^
effect of solar vari- ations. So yes, under these assumptions, human
power production would *just* show up as a contributor to global climate
change.

#### I heard that nuclear power can’t be built at a sufficient rate to make a useful contribution.

The difficulty of building nuclear power fast has been exaggerated with
the help of a misleading presentation technique I call “the magic
playing field.” In this technique, two things appear to be compared, but
the basis of the comparison is switched halfway through. The Guardian’s
environment editor, summarizing a report from the *Oxford Research
Group*, wrote “For nuclear power to make any significant contribution to
a reduction in global carbon emissions in the next two generations, the
industry would have to construct nearly 3000 new reactors – or about one
a week for 60 years. A civil nuclear construction and supply programme
on this scale is a pipe dream, and completely unfeasible. The highest
historic rate is 3.4 new reactors a year.” 3000 sounds much bigger than
3.4, doesn’t it! In this application of the “magic playing field”
technique, there is a switch not only of timescale but also of region.
While the first figure (3000 new reactors over 60 years) is the number
required *for the whole planet*, the second figure (3.4 new reactors per
year) is the maximum rate of building by a *single country* (France)!

A more honest presentation would have kept the comparison on a per-
planet basis. France has 59 of the world’s 429 operating nuclear
reactors, so it’s plausible that the highest rate of reactor building
for the whole planet was something like ten times France’s, that is, 34
new reactors per year. And the required rate (3000 new reactors over 60
years) is 50 new reactors per year. So the assertion that “civil nuclear
construction on this scale is a pipe dream, and completely unfeasible”
is poppycock. Yes, it’s a big construction rate, but it’s in the same
ballpark as historical construction rates.

How reasonable is my assertion that the world’s maximum historical
construction rate must have been about 34 new nuclear reactors per year?
Let’s look at the data. Figure 24.14 shows the power of the world’s
nuclear fleet as a function of time, showing only the power stations
still operational in 2007. The rate of new build was biggest in 1984,
and had a value of (drum-roll please...) about 30 GW per year – about 30
1-GW reactors. So there!

![](figure346.png)

![](figure202.png)

Figure 24.14. Graph of the total nuclear power in the world that was
built since 1967 and that is still operational today. The world
construction rate peaked at 30 GW of nuclear power per year in 1984.

What about nuclear fusion?
--------------------------

> We say that we will put the sun into a box. The idea is pretty. The
> problem is, we don’t know how to make the box.
>
> S´ebastien Balibar, Director of Research, CNRS

Fusion power is speculative and experimental. I think it is reckless to
assume that the fusion problem *will* be cracked, but I’m happy to
estimate how much power fusion could deliver, *if* the problem is
cracked.

The two fusion reactions that are considered the most promising are:

**the DT reaction**, which fuses deuterium with tritium, making helium;
and

**the DD reaction**, which fuses deuterium with deuterium.

Deuterium, a naturally occurring heavy isotope of hydrogen, can be ob-
tained from seawater; tritium, a heavier isotope of hydrogen, isn’t
found in large quantities naturally (because it has a half-life of only
12 years) but it can be manufactured from lithium.

ITER is an international project to figure out how to make a steadily-
working fusion reactor. The ITER prototype will use the DT reaction. DT
is preferred over DD, because the DT reaction yields more energy and be-
cause it requires a temperature of “only” 100 million °C to get it
going, whereas the DD reaction requires 300 million °C. (The maximum
temper- ature in the sun is 15 million °C.)

Let’s fantasize, and assume that the ITER project is successful. What
sustainable power could fusion then deliver? Power stations using the DT
reaction, fuelled by lithium, will run out of juice when the lithium
runs out. Before that time, hopefully the second installment of the
fantasy will have arrived: fusion reactors using deuterium alone.

I’ll call these two fantasy energy sources “lithium fusion” and “deu-
terium fusion,” naming them after the principal fuel we’d worry about in
each case. Let’s now estimate how much energy each of these sources
could deliver.

### Lithium fusion

World lithium reserves are estimated to be 9.5 million tons in ore
deposits. If all these reserves were devoted to fusion over 1000 years,
the power delivered would be 10 kWh/d per person.

There’s another source for lithium: seawater, where lithium has a con-
centration of 0.17 ppm. To produce lithium at a rate of 100 million kg
per year from seawater is estimated to have an energy requirement of 2.5
kWh(e) per gram of lithium. If the fusion reactors give back 2300 kWh(e)
per gram of lithium, the power thus delivered would be 105 kWh/d per
person (assuming 6 billion people). At this rate, the lithium in the
oceans would last more than a million years.

![](figure204.png)

Figure 24.15. The inside of an experimental fusion reactor. Split image
showing the JET vacuum vessel with a superimposed image of a JET plasma,
taken with an ordinary TV camera. Photo: EFDA-JET.

![](figure426.png)

Figure 24.16. Lithium-based fusion, if used fairly and “sustainably,”
could match our current levels of consumption. Mined lithium would
deliver 10 kWh/d per person for 1000 years; lithium extracted from
seawater could deliver 105 kWh/d per person for over a million years.

![](figure203.png)

### Deuterium fusion

If we imagine that scientists and engineers crack the problem of getting
the DD reaction going, we have some very good news. There’s 33 g of
deuterium in every ton of water, and the energy that would be released
from fusing just one gram of deuterium is a mind-boggling 100 000 kWh.
Bearing in mind that the mass of the oceans is 230 million tons per
person, we can deduce that there’s enough deuterium to supply every
person in a ten-fold increased world population with a power of 30 000
kWh per day (that’s more than 100 times the average American
consumption) for 1 million years (figure 24.17).

Notes and further reading
-------------------------

page no.

161*Figure 24.1*. Source: World Nuclear Association [5qntkb]. The total
capacity of operable nuclear reactors is 372 GW(e), using 65 000 tons of
uranium per year. The USA has 99 GW, France 63.5 GW, Japan 47.6 GW,
Russia 22 GW, Germany 20 GW, South Korea 17.5 GW, Ukraine 13 GW, Canada
12.6 GW, and UK 11 GW. In 2007 all the world’s reactors generated 2608
TWh of electricity, which is an average of 300 GW, or 1.2 kWh per day
per person.

162*Fast breeder reactors obtain 60 times as much energy from the
uranium*. Source: www.world-nuclear.org/info/inf98. html. Japan
currently leads the development of fast breeder reactors.

–*A once-through one-gigawatt nuclear power station uses 162 tons per
year of uranium*. Source: www.world-nuclear.org/info/inf03.html. A 1
GW(e) station with a thermal efficiency of 33% running at a load factor
of 83% has the following upstream footprint: mining – 16 600 tons of
1%-uranium ore; milling – 191 t of uranium oxide (containing 162 t of
natural uranium); enrichment and fuel fabrication – 22.4 t of uranium
oxide (containing 20 t of enriched uranium). The enrichment requires 115
000 SWU; see p102 for the energy cost of SWU (separative work units).

![](http://withouthotair.com/c24/figure.png)

Figure 24.17. Deuterium-based fusion, if it is achievable, offers
plentiful sustainable energy for millions of years. This diagram’s scale
is shrunk ten-fold in each dimension so as to fit fusion’s potential
contribution on the page. The red and green stacks from figure 18.1 are
shown to the same scale, for comparison.

163*it’s been estimated that the low-grade uranium resource is more than
1000 times greater than the 22 million tons we just assumed*. Deffeyes
and MacGregor (1980) estimate that the resource of uranium in
concentrations of 30 ppm or more is 3×10^10^ tons. (The average ore
grade processed in South Africa in 1985 and 1990 was 150 ppm. Phosphates
typically average 100 ppm.) Here’s what the World Nuclear Association
said on the topic of uranium reserves in June 2008: “From time to time
concerns are raised that the known resources might be insufficient when
judged as a multiple of present rate of use. But this is the Limits to
Growth fallacy, ... which takes no account of the very limited nature of
the knowledge we have at any time of what is actually in the Earth’s
crust. Our knowledge of geology is such that we can be confident that
identified resources of metal minerals are a small fraction of what is
there. “Measured resources of uranium, the amount known to be
economically recoverable from orebodies, are ... dependent on the
intensity of past exploration effort, and are basically a statement
about what is known rather than what is there in the Earth’s crust. “The
world’s present measured resources of uranium (5.5 Mt) ... are enough to
last for over 80 years. This represents a higher level of assured
resources than is normal for most minerals. Further exploration and
higher prices will certainly, on the basis of present geological
knowledge, yield further resources as present ones are used up.”
“Economically rational players will only invest in finding these new
reserves when they are most confident of gaining a return from them,
which usually requires positive price messages caused by undersupply
trends. If the economic system is working correctly and maximizing
capital efficiency, there should never be more than a few decades of any
resource commodity in reserves at any point in time.” [Exploration has a
cost; exploring for uranium, for example, has had a cost of \$1–\$1.50
per kg of uranium (\$3.4/MJ), which is 2% of the spot price of \$78/kgU;
in contrast, the finding costs of crude oil have averaged around
\$6/barrel (\$1050/MJ) (12% of the spot price) over at least the past
three decades.] “Unlike the metals which have been in demand for
centuries, society has barely begun to utilize uranium. There has been
only one cycle of exploration-discovery-production, driven in large part
by late 1970s price peaks. “It is premature to speak about long-term
uranium scarcity when the entire nuclear industry is so young that only
one cycle of resource replenishment has been required.”
www.world-nuclear.org/info/inf75.html Further reading: Herring (2004);
Price and Blaise (2002); Cohen (1983). The IPCC, citing the OECD,
project that at the 2004 utilization levels, the uranium in conventional
resources and phosphates would last 670 years in once-through reactors,
20 000 years in fast reactors with plutonium recycling, and 160 000
years in fast reactors recycling uranium and all actinides (Sims et al.,
2007).

165*Japanese researchers have found a technique for extracting uranium
from seawater*. The price estimate of \$100 per kg is from Seko et al.
(2003) and [y3wnzr]; the estimate of \$300 per kg is from OECD Nuclear
Energy Agency (2006, p130). The uranium extraction technique involves
dunking tissue in the ocean for a couple of months; the tissue is made
of polymer fibres that are rendered sticky by irradiating them before
they are dunked; the sticky fibres collect uranium to the tune of 2 g of
uranium per kilogram of fibre.

–*The expense of uranium extraction could be reduced by combining it
with another use of seawater – for example, power-station cooling*. The
idea of a nuclear-powered island producing hydrogen was floated by C.
Marchetti. Breeder reactors would be cooled by seawater and would
extract uranium from the cooling water at a rate of 600 t uranium per
500 000 Mt of seawater.

166*Thorium reactors deliver 3.6×10^9^ kWh of heat per ton of thorium*.
Source: www.world-nuclear.org/info/inf62.html. There remains scope for
advancement in thorium reactors, so this figure could be bumped up in
the future.

–*An alternative nuclear reactor for thorium, the “energy amplifier”...*
See Rubbia et al. (1995), web.ift.uib.no/ \~lillestol/Energy
Web/EA.html, [32t5zt], [2qr3yr], [ynk54y].

–*World thorium resources in monazite*. source: US Geological Survey,
Mineral Commodity Summaries, January 1999. [yl7tkm] Quoted in UIC
Nuclear Issues Briefing Paper \#67 November 2004. “Other ore minerals
with higher thorium contents, such as thorite, would be more likely
sources if demand significantly increased.”

[yju4a4] omits the figure for Turkey, which is found here: [yeyr7z].

167*The nuclear industry sold everyone in the UK 4 kWh/d for about 25
years*. The total generated to 2006 was about 2200 TWh. Source: Stephen
Salter’s Energy Review for the Scottish National Party.

–*The nuclear decommissioning authority has an annual budget of £2
billion*. In fact, this clean-up budget seems to rise and rise. The
latest figure for the total cost of decommissioning is £73 billion.
news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/7215688.stm

168*The criticism of the Chief Inspector of Nuclear Installations was
withering...* (Weightman, 2007).

–*Nuclear power is not infinitely dangerous. It’s just dangerous*.
Further reading on risk: Kammen and Hassenzahl (1999).

–*People in America living near coal-fired power stations are exposed to
higher radiation doses than those living near nuclear power plants*.
Source: McBride et al. (1978). Uranium and thorium have concentrations
of roughly 1 ppm and 2 ppm respectively in coal. Further reading:
gabe.web.psi.ch/research/ra/ra res.html,
www.physics.ohio-state.edu/\~wilkins/energy/Companion/E20.12.pdf.xpdf.

–*Nuclear power and wind power have the lowest death rates*. See also
Jones (1984). These death rates are from studies that are predicting the
future. We can also look in the past. In Britain, nuclear power has
generated 200 GWy of electricity, and the nuclear industry has had 1
fatality, a worker who died at Chapelcross in 1978 [4f2ekz]. One death
per 200 GWy is an impressively low death rate compared with the fossil
fuel industry. Worldwide, the nuclear-power historical death rate is
hard to estimate. The Three Mile Island meltdown killed no-one, and the
associated leaks are estimated to have perhaps killed one person in the
time since the accident. The accident at Chernobyl first killed 62 who
died directly from exposure, and 15 local people who died later of
thyroid cancer; it’s estimated that nearby, another 4000 died of cancer,
and that worldwide, about 5000 people (among 7 million who were exposed
to fallout) died of cancer because of Chernobyl (Williams and
Baverstock, 2006); but these deaths are impossible to detect because
cancers, many of them caused by natural nuclear radiation, already cause
25% of deaths in Europe. One way to estimate a global death rate from
nuclear power worldwide is to divide this estimate of Chernobyl’s death-
toll (9000 deaths) by the cumulative output of nuclear power from 1969
to 1996, which was 3685 GWy. This gives a death rate of 2.4 deaths per
GWy. As for deaths attributed to wind, Caithness Windfarm Information
Forum www.caithnesswindfarms.co.uk list 49 fatalities worldwide from
1970 to 2007 (35 wind industry workers and 14 members of the public). In
2007, Paul Gipe listed 34 deaths total worldwide
[www.wind-works.org/articles/BreathLife.html]. In the mid-1990s the
mortality rate associated with wind power was 3.5 deaths per GWy.
According to Paul Gipe, the worldwide mortality rate of wind power
dropped to 1.3 deaths per GWy by the end of 2000. So the historical
death rates of both nuclear power and wind are higher than the predicted
future death rates.

169*The steel and concrete in a 1 GW nuclear power station have a carbon
footprint of roughly 300 000 t CO~2~*. A 1 GW nuclear power station
contains 520 000 m^3^ of concrete (1.2 million tons) and 67 000 tons of
steel [2k8y7o]. Assuming 240 kg CO~2~ per m^3^ of concrete [3pvf4j], the
concrete’s footprint is around 100 000 t CO~2~. From Blue Scope Steel
[4r7zpg], the footprint of steel is about 2.5 tons of CO~2~ per ton of
steel. So the 67 000 tons of steel has a footprint of about 170 000 tons
of CO~2~.

170*Nuclear waste discussion*. Sources:
www.world-nuclear.org/info/inf04.html, [49hcnw], [3kduo7]. New nuclear
waste compared with old. Committee on Radioactive Waste Management
(2006).

172*World lithium reserves are estimated as 9.5 million tons*. The main
lithium sources are found in Bolivia (56.6%), Chile (31.4%) and the USA
(4.3%). www.dnpm.gov.br

–*There’s another source for lithium: seawater...* Several extraction
techniques have been investigated (Steinberg and Dang, 1975; Tsuruta,
2005; Chitrakar et al., 2001).

–*Fusion power from lithium reserves.* The energy density of natural
lithium is about 7500 kWh per gram (Ongena and Van Oost, 2006). There’s
considerable variation among the estimates of how efficiently fusion
reactors would turn this into electricity, ranging from 310 kWh(e)/g
(Eckhartt, 1995) to 3400 kWh(e)/g of natural lithium (Steinberg and
Dang, 1975). I’ve assumed 2300 kWh(e)/g, based on this widely quoted
summary figure: “A 1 GW fusion plant will use about 100 kg of deuterium
and 3 tons of natural lithium per year, generating about 7 billion kWh.”
[69vt8r], [6oby22], [63l2lp].

Further reading about fission: Hodgson (1999), Nuttall (2004), Rogner
(2000), Williams (2000). Uranium Information Center – www.uic.com.au.
www.world-nuclear.org, [wnchw]. On costs: Zaleski (2005). On waste
repositories: [shrln]. On breeder reactors and thorium:
www.energyfromthorium.com.

Further reading about fusion: www.fusion.org.uk,
www.askmar.com/Fusion.html.

25   Living on other countries’ renewables? {.green}
===========================================

> Whether the Mediterranean becomes an area of cooperation or
> confrontation in the 21st century will be of strategic importance to
> our common security.
>
> Joschka Fischer, German Foreign Minister, February 2004

We’ve found that it’s hard to get off fossil fuels by living on our own
re- newables. Nuclear has its problems too. So what else can we do?
Well, how about living on someone else’s renewables? (Not that we have
any en- titlement to someone else’s renewables, of course, but perhaps
they might be interested in selling them to us.)

Most of the resources for living sustainably are related to land area:
if you want to use solar panels, you need land to put them on; if you
want to grow crops, you need land again. Jared Diamond, in his book
Collapse, observes that, while many factors contribute to the collapse
of civilizations, a common feature of all collapses is that the human
population density became too great.

Places like Britain and Europe are in a pickle because they have large
population densities, and all the available renewables are diffuse –
they have small power density (table 25.1). When looking for help, we
should look to countries that have three things: a) low population
density; b) large area; and c) a renewable power supply with high power
density.

  Region           Population      Area (km^2^)   Density (persons per km^2^)   Area per person (m^2^)
  ---------------- --------------- -------------- ----------------------------- ------------------------
  Libya            5 760 000       1 750 000      3                             305 000
  Kazakhstan       15 100 000      2 710 000      6                             178 000
  Saudi Arabia     26 400 000      1 960 000      13                            74 200
  Algeria          32 500 000      2 380 000      14                            73 200
  Sudan            40 100 000      2 500 000      16                            62 300
  World            6 440 000 000   148 000 000    43                            23 100
  Scotland         5 050 000       78 700         64                            15 500
  European Union   496 000 000     4 330 000      115                           8 720
  Wales            2 910 000       20 700         140                           7 110
  United Kingdom   59 500 000      244 000        243                           4 110
  England          49 600 000      130 000        380                           2 630

Table 25.2 highlights some countries that fit the bill. Libya’s
population density, for example, is 70 times smaller than Britain’s, and
its area is 7 times bigger. Other large, area-rich, countries are
Kazakhstan, Saudi Arabia, Algeria, and Sudan.

POWER PER UNIT LAND OR WATER AREA

Wind

2 W/m^2^

Offshore wind

3 W/m^2^

Tidal pools

3 W/m^2^

Tidal stream

6 W/m^2^

Solar PV panels

5–20 W/m^2^

Plants

0.5 W/m^2^

Rain-water    (highlands)

0.24 W/m^2^

Hydroelectric    facility

11 W/m^2^

Solar chimney

0.1 W/m^2^

**Concentrating solar    power (desert)**

15 W/m^2^

Table 25.1. Renewable facilities have to be country-sized because all
renewables are so diffuse.

Table 25.2. Some regions, ordered from small to large population
density. See p338 for more population densities.

In all these countries, I think the most promising renewable is so- lar
power, *concentrating solar power* in particular, which uses mirrors or
lenses to focus sunlight. Concentrating solar power stations come in
several flavours, arranging their moving mirrors in various geometries,
and putting various power conversion technologies at the focus –
Stirling en- gines, pressurized water, or molten salt, for example – but
they all deliver fairly similar average powers per unit area, in the
ballpark of 15 W/m^2^.

A technology that adds up
-------------------------

“All the world’s power could be provided by a square 100 km by 100 km in
the Sahara.” Is this true? Concentrating solar power in deserts delivers
an average power per unit land area of roughly 15 W/m^2^. So, allowing
no space for anything else in such a square, the power delivered would
be 150 GW. This is *not* the same as current world power consumption.
It’s not even near current world *electricity* consumption, which is
2000 GW. World power consumption today is 15 000 GW. So the correct
statement about power from the Sahara is that today’s consumption could
be provided by a *1000 km by 1000 km* square in the desert, completely
filled with concentrating solar power. That’s four times the area of the
UK. And if we are interested in living in an equitable world, we should
presumably aim to supply more than *today’s* consumption. To supply
every person in the world with an average European’s power consumption
(125 kWh/d), the area required would be *two* 1000 km by 1000 km squares
in the desert.

Fortunately, the Sahara is not the only desert, so maybe it’s more rele-
vant to chop the world into smaller regions, and ask what area is needed
in each region’s local desert. So, focusing on Europe, “what area is
required in the North Sahara to supply *everyone in Europe and North
Africa* with an average European’s power consumption? Taking the
population of Europe and North Africa to be 1 billion, the area required
drops to 340 000 km^2^, which corresponds to a square **600 km by 600
km**. This area is equal to one Germany, to 1.4 United Kingdoms, or to
**16 Waleses**.

The UK’s share of this 16-Wales area would be one Wales: a 145 km by 145
km square in the Sahara would provide all the UK’s current primary
energy consumption. These squares are shown in figure 25.5. Notice that
while the yellow square may look “little” compared with Africa, it does
have the same area as Germany.

### The DESERTEC plan

An organization called DESERTEC [www.desertec.org] is promoting a plan
to use concentrating solar power in sunny Mediterranean countries, and
high-voltage direct-current (HVDC) transmission lines (figure 25.7) to
deliver the power to cloudier northern parts. HVDC technology has been
in use since 1954 to transmit power both through overhead lines and
through

![](figure205.png)

Figure 25.3. Stirling dish engine. These beautiful concentrators deliver
a power per unit land area of 14 W/m^2^. Photo courtesy of Stirling
Energy Systems. www.stirlingenergy.com

![](figure208.png)

Figure 25.4. Andasol – a “100MW” solar power station under construction
in Spain. Excess thermal energy produced during the day will be stored
in liquid salt tanks for up to seven hours, allowing a continuous and
stable supply of electric power to the grid. The power station is
predicted to produce 350 GWh per year (40 MW). The parabolic troughs
occupy 400 hectares, so the power per unit land area will be 10 W/m^2^.
Upper photo: ABB. Lower photo: IEA SolarPACES.

![](figure427.png)

submarine cables (such as the interconnector between France and
England). It is already used to transmit electricity over 1000-km
distances in South Africa, China, America, Canada, Brazil, and Congo. A
typical 500 kV line can transmit a power of 2 GW. A pair of HVDC lines
in Brazil transmits 6.3 GW.

HVDC is preferred over traditional high-voltage AC lines because less
physical hardware is needed, less land area is needed, and the power
losses of HVDC are smaller. The power losses on a 3500 km-long HVDC
line, in- cluding conversion from AC to DC and back, would be about 15%.
A further advantage of HVDC systems is that they help stabilize the
electricity networks to which they are connected.

In the DESERTEC plans, the prime areas to exploit are coastal areas,
because concentrating solar power stations that are near to the sea can
deliver desalinated water as a by-product – valuable for human use, and
for agriculture.

Table 25.6 shows DESERTEC’s estimates of the potential power that

Figure 25.5. The celebrated little square. This map shows a square of
size 600 km by 600 km in Africa, and another in Saudi Arabia, Jordan,
and Iraq. Concentrating solar power facilities completely filling one
such square would provide enough power to give 1 billion people the
average European’s consumption of 125 kWh/d. The area of one square is
the same as the area of Germany, and 16 times the area of Wales. Within
each big square is a smaller 145 km by 145 km square showing the area
required in the Sahara – one Wales – to supply all British power
consumption.

  Country        Economic potential (TWh/y)   Coastal potential (TWh/y)
  -------------- ---------------------------- ---------------------------
  Algeria        169 000                      60
  Libya          140 000                      500
  Saudi Arabia   125 000                      2 000
  Egypt          74 000                       500
  Iraq           29 000                       60
  Morocco        20 000                       300
  Oman           19 000                       500
  Syria          10 000                       0
  Tunisia        9 200                        350
  Jordan         6 400                        0
  Yemen          5 100                        390
  Israel         3 100                        1
  UAE            2 000                        540
  Kuwait         1 500                        130
  Spain          1 300                        70
  Qatar          800                          320
  Portugal       140                          7
  Turkey         130                          12
  Total          620 000 (70 000 GW)          6 000 (650 GW)

could be produced in countries in Europe and North Africa. The “eco-
nomic potential” adds up to more than enough to supply 125 kWh per day
to 1 billion people. The total “coastal potential” is enough to supply
16 kWh per day per person to 1 billion people.

Let’s try to convey on a map what a realistic plan could look like.
Imagine making solar facilities each having an area of 1500 km^2^ –
that’s roughly the size of London. (Greater London has an area of 1580
km^2^; the M25 orbital motorway around London encloses an area of 2300
km^2^.) Let’s call each facility a *blob*. Imagine that in each of these
blobs, half the area is devoted to concentrating power stations with an
average power density of 15 W/m^2^, leaving space around for
agriculture, buildings, railways, roads, pipelines, and cables. Allowing
for 10% transmission loss between the blob and the consumer, each of
these blobs generates an average power of 10 GW. Figure 25.8 shows some
blobs to scale on a map. To give a sense of the scale of these blobs
I’ve dropped a few in Britain too. *Four* of these blobs would have an
output roughly equal to Britain’s total electricity consumption (16
kWh/d per person for 60 million people). *Sixty-five* blobs would
provide all one billion people in Europe and North Africa with 16 kWh/d
per person. Figure 25.8 shows 68 blobs in the desert.

Table 25.6. Solar power potential in countries around and near to
Europe. The “economic potential” is the power that could be generated in
suitable places where the direct normal irradiance is more than 2000
kWh/m^2^/y. The “coastal potential” is the power that could be generated
within 20 m (vertical) of sea level; such power is especially promising
because of the potential combination with desalination. For comparison,
the total power required to give 125 kWh per day to 1 billion people is
46 000 TWh/y (5 200 GW). 6000 TWh/y (650 GW) is 16 kWh per day per
person for 1 billion people.

![](figure206.png)

Figure 25.7. Laying a high-voltage DC link between Finland and Estonia.
A pair of these cables transmit a power of 350 MW. Photo: ABB.

![](figure207.png)

Figure 25.8. Each circular blobrepresents an area of 1500 km^2^,which,
if
one-third-filled[^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#181)
with solarpower facilities, would generate10 GW on average. 65 such
blobswould provide 1 billion people with16 kWh/d per person.

### Concentrating photovoltaics

An alternative to concentrating thermal solar power in deserts is large-
scale concentrating photovoltaic systems. To make these, we plop a high-
quality electricity-producing solar cell at the focus of cheap lenses or
mirrors. Faiman et al. (2007) say that “solar, in its concentrator
photovoltaics variety, can be completely cost-competitive with fossil
fuel [in desert states such as California, Arizona, New Mexico, and
Texas] without the need for any kind of subsidy.”

According to manufacturers Amonix, this form of concentrating solar
power would have an average power per unit land area of 18 W/m^2^.

Another way to get a feel for required hardware is to personalize. One
of the “25 kW” (peak) collectors shown in figure 25.9 generates on
average about 138 kWh per day; the American lifestyle currently uses 250
kWh per day per person. So to get the USA off fossil fuels using solar
power, we need roughly two of these 15 m×15 m collectors per person.

Queries
-------

#### I’m confused! In Chapter 6, you said that the best photovoltaic panels deliver 20 W/m^2^ on average, in a place with British sun- niness. Presumably in the desert the same panels would deliver 40 W/m^2^. So how come the concentrating solar power stations deliver only 15–20 W/m^2^? Surely concentrating power should be even better than plain flat panels?

Good question. The short answer is no. Concentrating solar power does
not achieve a better power per unit land area than flat panels. The
concen- trating contraption has to track the sun, otherwise the sunlight
won’t be focused right; once you start packing land with sun-tracking
contraptions, you have to leave gaps between them; lots of sunlight
falls through the gaps and is lost. The reason that people nevertheless
make concentrating solar power systems is that, today, flat photovoltaic
panels are very expensive, and concentrating systems are cheaper. The
concentrating people’s goal is not to make systems with big power per
unit land area. Land area is cheap (they assume). The goal is to deliver
big power per dollar.

#### But if flat panels have bigger power density, why don’t you des- cribe covering the Sahara desert with them?

Because I am trying to discuss practical options for large-scale
sustainable power production for Europe and North Africa by 2050. My
guess is that by 2050, mirrors will still be cheaper than photovoltaic
panels, so concentrating solar power is the technology on which we
should focus.

#### What about solar chimneys?

A solar chimney or solar updraft tower uses solar power in a very simple
way. A huge chimney is built at the centre of an area covered by a
transparent roof made of glass or plastic; because hot air rises, hot
air created

![](figure209.png)

Figure 25.9. A 25 kW (peak) concentrator photovoltaic collector produced
by Californian company Amonix. Its 225 m^2^ aperture contains 5760
Fresnel lenses with optical concentration ×260, each of which
illuminates a 25%-efficient silicon cell. One such collector, in an
appropriate desert location, generates 138 kWh per day – enough to cover
the energy consumption of half an American. Note the human providing a
scale. Photo by David Faiman.

in this greenhouse-like heat-collector whooshes up the chimney, drawing
in cooler air from the perimeter of the heat-collector. Power is
extracted from the air-flow by turbines at the base of the chimney.
Solar chimneys are fairly simple to build, but they don’t deliver a very
impressive power per unit area. A pilot plant in Manzanares, Spain
operated for seven years between 1982 and 1989. The chimney had a height
of 195 m and a diameter of 10 m; the collector had a diameter of 240 m,
and its roof had 6000 m^2^ of glass and 40 000 m^2^ of transparent
plastic. It generated 44 MWh per year, which corresponds to a power per
unit area of 0.1 W/m^2^. Theoretically, the bigger the collector and the
taller the chimney, the bigger the power density of a solar chimney
becomes. The engineers behind Manzanares reckon that, at a site with a
solar radiation of 2300 kWh/m^2^ per year (262 W/m^2^), a 1000 m-high
tower surrounded by a 7 km-diameter collector could gen- erate 680 GWh
per year, an average power of 78 MW. That’s a power per unit area of
about 1.6 W/m^2^, which is similar to the power per unit area of
windfarms in Britain, and one tenth of the power per unit area I said
concentrating solar power stations would deliver. It’s claimed that
solar chimneys could generate electricity at a price similar to that of
conventional power stations. I suggest that countries that have enough
land and sunshine to spare should host a big bake-off contest between
solar chimneys and concentrating solar power, to be funded by
oil-producing and oil-consuming countries.

#### What about getting power from Iceland, where geothermal pow- er and hydroelectricity are so plentiful?

Indeed, Iceland already effectively exports energy by powering
industries that make energy-intensive products. Iceland produces nearly
one ton of aluminium per citizen per year, for example! So from
Iceland’s point of view, there are great profits to be made. But can
Iceland save Europe? I would be surprised if Iceland’s power production
could be scaled up enough to make sizeable electricity exports even to
Britain alone. As a benchmark, let’s compare with the England–France
Interconnector, which can deliver up to 2 GW across the English Channel.
That maximum power is equivalent to 0.8 kWh per day per person in the
UK, roughly 5% of British average electricity consumption. Iceland’s
average geothermal elec- tricity generation is just 0.3 GW, which is
less than 1% of Britain’s average electricity consumption. Iceland’s
average electricity production is 1.1 GW. So to create a link sending
power equal to the capacity of the French inter- connector, Iceland
would have to *triple* its electricity production. To provide us with 4
kWh per day per person (roughly what Britain gets from its own nuclear
power stations), Iceland’s electricity production would have to increase
*ten-fold*. It is probably a good idea to build interconnectors to
Iceland, but don’t expect them to deliver more than a small
contribution.

![](figure210.png)

Figure 25.10. The Manzanares prototype solar chimney. Photos from
solarmillennium.de.

![](figure211.png)

Figure 25.11. More geothermal power in Iceland. Photo by Rosie Ward.

Notes and further reading
-------------------------

page no.

178*Concentrating solar power in deserts delivers an average power per
unit area of roughly 15 W/m^2^*. My sources for this number are two
companies making concentrating solar power for deserts.
www.stirlingenergy.com says one of its dishes with a 25 kW Stirling
engine at its focus can generate 60 000 kWh/y in a favourable desert
location. They could be packed at a concentration of one dish per 500
m^2^. That’s an average power of 14 W/m^2^. They say that solar dish
Stirling makes the best use of land area, in terms of energy delivered.
www.ausra.com uses flat mirrors to heat water to 285 °C and drive a
steam turbine. The heated, pressurized water can be stored in deep
metal-lined caverns to allow power generation at night. Describing a
“240 MW(e)” plant proposed for Australia (Mills and LiÈvre, 2004), the
designers claim that 3.5 km^2^ of mirrors would deliver 1.2 TWh(e);
that’s 38 W/m^2^ of mirror. To find the power per unit land area, we
need to allow for the gaps between the mirrors. Ausra say they need a
153 km by 153 km square in the desert to supply all US electric power
(Mills and Morgan, 2008). Total US electricity is 3600 TWh/y, so they
are claiming a power per unit land area of 18 W/m^2^. This technology
goes by the name *compact linear fresnel reflector* (Mills and Morrison,
2000; Mills et al., 2004; Mills and Morgan, 2008). Incidentally, rather
than “concentrating solar power,” the company Ausra prefers to use the
term *solar thermal electricity* (STE); they emphasize the benefits of
ther- mal storage, in contrast to concentrating photovoltaics, which
don’t come with a natural storage option. Trieb and Knies (2004), who
are strong proponents of concentrating solar power, project that the
alternative concentrating solar power technologies would have powers per
unit land area in the following ranges: parabolic troughs, 14–19 W/m^2^;
linear fresnel collector, 19–28 W/m^2^; tower with helio- stats, 9–14
W/m^2^; stirling dish, 9–14 W/m^2^. There are three European
demonstration plants for concentrating solar power. Andasol – using
parabolic troughs; Solúcar PS10, a tower near Seville; and Solartres, a
tower using molten salt for heat storage. The Andasol parabolic- trough
system shown in figure 25.4 is predicted to deliver 10 W/m^2^. Solúcar’s
“11 MW” solar tower has 624 mirrors, each 121 m^2^. The mirrors
concentrate sunlight to a radiation density of up to 650 kW/m^2^. The
receiver receives a peak power of 55 MW. The power station can store 20
MWh of thermal energy, allowing it to keep going during 50 minutes of
cloudiness. It was expected to generate 24.2 GWh of electricity per
year, and it occupies 55 hectares. That’s an average power per unit land
area of 5 W/m^2^. (Source: Abengoa Annual Report 2003.) Solartres will
occupy 142 hectares and is expected to produce 96.4 GWh per year; that’s
a power density of 8 W/m^2^. Andasol and Solartres will both use some
natural gas in normal operation.

179*HVDC is already used to transmit electricity over 1000-km distances
in South Africa, China, America, Canada, Brazil, and Congo.* Sources:
Asplund (2004), Bahrman and Johnson (2007). Further reading on HVDC:
Carlsson (2002).

![](figure212.png)

Figure 25.12. Two engineers assembling an eSolar concentrating power
station using heliostats (mirrors that rotate and tip to follow the
sun). esolar.com make medium-scale power stations: a 33 MW (peak) power
unit on a 64 hectare site. That’s 51 W/m^2^ peak, so I’d guess that in a
typical desert location they would deliver about one quarter of that: 13
W/m^2^.

![](figure428.png)

Figure 25.13. A high-voltage DC power system in China. Photo: ABB.

179*Losses on a 3500 km-long HVDC line, including conversion from AC to
DC and back,would be about 15%.* Sources: Trieb and Knies (2004); van
Voorthuy- sen (2008).

182 *According to Amonix, concentrating photovoltaics would have an
average power per unit land area of 18 W/m^2^.* The assumptions of
www.amonix.com are: the lens transmits 85% of the light; 32% cell
efficiency; 25% collector efficiency; and 10% further loss due to
shading. Aperture/land ratio of 1/3. Normal direct irradiance: 2222
kWh/m^2^/year. They expect each kW of peak capacity to deliver 2000
kWh/y (an average of 0.23 kW). A plant of 1 GW peak capacity would
occupy 12 km^2^ of land and deliver 2000 GWh per year. That’s 18 W/m^2^.

–*Solar chimneys.* Sources: Schlaich J (2001); Schlaich et al. (2005);
Dennis (2006), www.enviromission.com.au, www.solarairpower.com.

183*Iceland’s average geothermal electricity generation is just 0.3 GW.
Iceland’s average electricity production is 1.1 GW.* These are the
statistics for 2006: 7.3 TWh of hydroelectricity and 2.6 TWh of
geothermal electricity, with ca- pacities of 1.16 GW and 0.42 GW,
respectively. Source: Orkustofnun National Energy Authority
[www.os.is/page/energystatistics].

Further reading: European Commission (2007), German Aerospace Center
(DLR) Institute of Technical Thermodynamics Section Systems Analysis and
Tech- nology Assessment (2006), www.solarmillennium.de.

26   Fluctuations and storage {.darkblue}
=============================

> The wind, as a direct motive power, is wholly inapplicable to a system
> of machine labour, for during a calm season the whole business of the
> country would be thrown out of gear. Before the era of steamengines,
> windmills were tried for draining mines; but though they were powerful
> machines, they were very irregular, so that in a long tract of calm
> weather the mines were drowned, and all the workmen thrown idle.
>
> William Stanley Jevons, 1865

![](figure429.png)

If we kick fossil fuels and go all-out for renewables, *or* all-out for
nuclear, *or* a mixture of the two, we may have a problem. Most of the
big renewables are not turn-off-and-onable. When the wind blows and the
sun comes out, power is there for the taking; but maybe two hours later,
it’s not available any more. Nuclear power stations are not usually
designed to be turn-offand- onable either. They are usually on all the
time, and their delivered power can be turned down and up only on a
timescale of hours. This is a problem because, on an electricity
network, consumption and production must be exactly equal all the time.
The electricity grid can’t *store* energy. To have an energy plan that
adds up every minute of every day, we therefore need *something easily
turn-off-and-onable*. It’s commonly assumed that the easily
turn-off-and-onable something should be a *source* of power that gets
turned off and on to compensate for the fluctuations of supply relative
to demand (for example, a fossil fuel power station!). But another
equally effective way to match supply and demand would be to have an
easily turn-off-and-onable *demand* for power – a sink of power that can
be turned off and on at the drop of a hat.

Either way, the easily turn-off-and-onable something needs to be a *big*
something because electricity demand varies a lot (figure 26.1). The de-

Figure 26.1. Electricity demand in Great Britain (in kWh/d per person)
during two winter weeks and two summer weeks of 2006. The peaks in
January are at 6pm each day. The five-day working week is evident in
summer and winter. (If you’d like to obtain the national demand in GW,
remember the top of the scale, 24 kWh/d per person, is the same as 60 GW
per UK.)

![](figure213.png)

mand sometimes changes significantly on a timescale of a few minutes.
This chapter discusses how to cope with fluctuations in supply and
demand, without using fossil fuels.

How much do renewables fluctuate?
---------------------------------

However much we love renewables, we must not kid ourselves about the
fact that wind does fluctuate.

Critics of wind power say: “Wind power is intermittent and
unpredictable, so it can make no contribution to security of supply; if
we create lots of wind power, we’ll have to maintain lots of fossil-fuel
power plant to replace the wind when it drops.” Headlines such as “Loss
of wind causes Texas power grid emergency” reinforce this view.
Supporters of wind energy play down this problem: “Don’t worry –
*individual* wind farms may be intermittent, but taken together, the
*sum* of all wind farms in different locations is much less
intermittent.”

Let’s look at real data and try to figure out a balanced viewpoint.
Figure 26.2 shows the summed output of the wind fleet of the Republic of
Ireland from April 2006 to April 2007. Clearly wind is intermittent,
even if we add up lots of turbines covering a whole country. The UK is a
bit larger than Ireland, but the same problem holds there too. Between
October 2006 and February 2007 there were 17 days when the output from
Britain’s 1632 windmills was less than 10% of their capacity. During
that period there were five days when output was less than 5% and one
day when it was

Figure 26.2. Total output, in MW, of all wind farms of the Republic of
Ireland, from April 2006 to April 2007 (top), and detail from January
2007 to April 2007 (middle), and February 2007 (bottom). Peak
electricity demand in Ireland is about 5000 MW. Its wind “capacity” in
2007 is 745 MW, dispersed in about 60 wind farms. Data are provided
every 15 minutes by www.eirgrid.com.

![](figure214.png)

only 2%.

Let’s quantify the fluctuations in country-wide wind power. The two
issues are short-term changes, and long-term lulls. Let’s find the
fastest short-term change in a month of Irish wind data. On 11th
February 2007, the Irish wind power fell steadily from 415 MW at
midnight to 79 MW at 4am. That’s a slew rate of 84 MW per hour for a
country-wide fleet of capacity 745 MW. (By slew rate I mean the rate at
which the delivered power fell or rose – the slope of the graph on 11th
February.) OK: if we scale British wind power up to a capacity of 33 GW
(so that it delivers 10 GW on average), we can expect to have occasional
slew rates of

84 MW/h × 

33 000 MW 

= 3700 MW/h,

745 MW

assuming Britain is like Ireland. So we need to be able to either power
*up* replacements for wind at a rate of 3.7 GW per hour – that’s 4
nuclear power stations going from no power to full power every hour, say
– *or* we need to be able to suddenly turn *down* our *demand* at a rate
of 3.7 GW per hour.

Could these windy demands be met? In answering this question we’ll need
to talk more about “gigawatts.” Gigawatts are big country-sized units of
power. They are to a country what a kilowatt-hour-per-day is to a
person: a nice convenient unit. The UK’s average electricity consumption
is about 40 GW. We can relate this national number to personal
consumption: 1 kWh per day per person is equivalent to 2.5 GW
nationally. So if every person uses 16 kWh per day of electricity, then
national consumption is 40 GW.

Is a national slew-rate of 4 GW per hour completely outside human
experience? No. Every morning, as figure 26.3 shows, British demand
climbs by about 13 GW between 6.30am and 8.30am. That’s a slew rate of
*6.5 GW per hour*. So our power engineers already cope, every day, with
slew rates bigger than 4GW per hour on the national grid. An extra
occasional slew of 4 GW per hour induced by sudden wind variations is no
reasonable cause for ditching the idea of country-sized wind farms. It’s
a problem

Figure 26.3. Electricity demand in Great Britain during two winter weeks
of 2006. The left and right scales show the demand in national units
(GW) and personal units (kWh/d per person) respectively. These are the
same data as in figure 26.1.

just like problems that engineers have already solved. We simply need to
figure out how to match ever-changing supply and demand in a grid with
no fossil fuels. I’m not saying that the wind-slew problem is *already*
solved – just that it is a problem of the same size as other problems
that have been solved.

OK, before we start looking for solutions, we need to quantify wind’s
other problem: long-term lulls. At the start of February 2007, Ireland
had a country-wide lull that lasted five days. This was not an unusual
event, as you can see in figure 26.2. Lulls lasting two or three days
happen several times a year.

There are two ways to get through lulls. Either we can store up energy
somewhere before the lull, or we need to have a way of reducing demand
during the entire lull. (Or a mix of the two.) If we have 33 GW of wind
turbines delivering an average power of 10 GW then the amount of energy
we must either store up in advance or do without during a five-day lull
is

10 GW × (5 × 24 h) = 1200 GWh.

(The gigawatt-hour (GWh) is the cuddly energy unit for nations.
Britain’s electricity consumption is roughly 1000 GWh per day.)

To personalize this quantity, an energy store of 1200 GWh for the nation
is equivalent to an energy store of 20 kWh per person. Such an energy
store would allow the nation to go without 10 GW of electricity for 5
days; or equivalently, every individual to go without 4 kWh per day of
electricity for 5 days.

Coping with lulls and slews
---------------------------

We need to solve two problems – lulls (long periods with small renewable
production), and slews (short-term changes in either supply or demand).
We’ve quantified these problems, assuming that Britain had roughly 33 GW
of wind power. To cope with lulls, we must effectively store up roughly
1200 GWh of energy (20 kWh per person). The slew rate we must cope with
is 6.5 GW per hour (or 0.1 kW per hour per person).

There are two solutions, both of which could scale up to solve these
problems. The first solution is a centralized solution, and the second
is decentralized. The first solution stores up energy, then copes with
fluctuations by turning on and off a *source* powered from the energy
store. The second solution works by turning on and off a piece of
*demand*.

The first solution is *pumped storage*. The second uses the batteries of
the *electric vehicles* that we discussed in Chapter 20. Before I
describe these solutions, let’s discuss a few other ideas for coping
with slew.

### Other supply-side ways of coping with slew

Some of the renewables are turn-off-and-onable. If we had a lot of
renew- able power that was easily turn-off-and-onable, all the problems
of this chapter would go away. Countries like Norway and Sweden have
large and deep hydroelectric supplies which they can turn on and off.
What might the options be in Britain?

First, Britain could have lots of waste incinerators and biomass
inciner- ators – power stations playing the role that is today played by
fossil power stations. If these stations were designed to be
turn-off-and-onable, there would be cost implications, just as there are
costs when we have extra fossil power stations that are only working
part-time: their generators would sometimes be idle and sometimes work
twice as hard; and most generators aren’t as efficient if you keep
turning them up and down, compared with running them at a steady speed.
OK, leaving cost to one side, the crucial question is how big a
turn-off-and-onable resource we might have. If all municipal waste were
incinerated, and an equal amount of agricultural waste were incinerated,
then the average power from these sources would be about 3 GW. If we
built capacity equal to *twice* this power, making incinerators capable
of delivering 6 GW, and thus planning to have them operate only half the
time, these would be able to deliver 6 GW throughout periods of high
demand, then zero in the wee hours. These power stations could be
designed to switch on or off within an hour, thus coping with slew rates
of 6 GW per hour – but only for a maximum slew range of 6 GW! That’s a
helpful contribution, but not enough slew range in itself, if we are to
cope with the fluctuations of 33 GW of wind.

What about hydroelectricity? Britain’s hydroelectric stations have an
average load factor of 20% so they certainly have the potential to be
turned on and off. Furthermore, hydro has the wonderful feature that it
can be turned on and off very quickly. Glendoe, a new hydro station with
a capacity of 100 MW, will be able to switch from off to on in 30
seconds, for example. That’s a slew rate of 12 GW per hour in just one
power station! So a sufficiently large fleet of hydro power stations
should be able to cope with the slew introduced by enormous wind farms.
However, the capacity of the British hydro fleet is *not* currently big
enough to make much con- tribution to our slew problem (assuming we want
to cope with the rapid loss of say 10 or 33 GW of wind power). The total
capacity of traditional hydroelectric stations in Britain is only about
1.5 GW.

So simply switching on and off other renewable power sources is not
going to work in Britain. We need other solutions.

Pumped storage
--------------

Pumped storage systems use cheap electricity to shove water from a
downhill lake to an uphill lake; then regenerate electricity when it’s
valuable,

  station      power (GW)   head (m)   volume (million m^3^)   energy stored (GWh)
  ------------ ------------ ---------- ----------------------- ---------------------
  Ffestiniog   0.36         320–295    1.7                     1.3
  Cruachan     0.40         365–334    11.3                    10
  Foyers       0.30         178–172    13.6                    6.3
  Dinorwig     1.80         542–494    6.7                     9.1

![](figure215.png)

using turbines just like the ones in hydroelectric power stations.

Britain has four pumped storage facilities, which can store 30 GWh be-
tween them (table 26.4, figure 26.6). They are typically used to store
excess electricity at night, then return it during the day, especially
at moments of peak demand – a profitable business, as figure 26.5 shows.
The Dinorwig power station – an astonishing cathedral inside a mountain
in Snowdonia – also plays an insurance role: it has enough oomph to
restart the national grid in the event of a major failure. Dinorwig can
switch on, from 0 to 1.3 GW power, in 12 seconds.

Dinorwig is the Queen of the four facilities. Let’s review her vital
statis- tics. The total energy that can be stored in Dinorwig is about 9
GWh. Its upper lake is about 500 m above the lower, and the working
volume of 7 million m^3^ flows at a maximum rate of 390 m^3^/s, allowing
power delivery at 1.7 GW for 5 hours. The efficiency of this storage
system is 75%.

If all four pumped storage stations are switched on simultaneously, they
can produce a power of 2.8 GW. They can switch on extremely fast, coping
with any slew rate that demand-fluctuations or wind-fluctuations could
come up with. However the capacity of 2.8 GW is not enough to replace 10
GW or 33 GW of wind power if it suddenly went missing. Nor is the total
energy stored (30 GWh) anywhere near the 1200 GWh we are interested in
storing in order to make it through a big lull. Could pumped

Table 26.4. Pumped storage facilities in Britain. The maximum energy
storable in today’s pumped storage systems is about 30 GWh.

Figure 26.5. How pumped storage pays for itself. Electricity prices, in
£ per MWh, on three days in 2006 and 2007.

![](figure218.png)

Figure 26.6. Llyn Stwlan, the upper reservoir of the Ffestiniog pumped
storage scheme in north Wales. Energy stored: 1.3 GWh. Photo by Adrian
Pingstone.

storage be ramped up? Can we imagine solving the entire lull problem
using pumped storage alone?

### Can we store 1200 GWh?

We are interested in making much bigger storage systems, storing a total
of 1200 GWh (about 130 times what Dinorwig stores). And we’d like the
capacity to be about 20 GW – about ten times bigger than Dinorwig’s. So
here is the pumped storage solution: we have to imagine creating roughly
12 new sites, each storing 100 GWh – roughly ten times the energy stored
in Dinorwig. The pumping and generating hardware at each site would be
the same as Dinorwig’s.

Assuming the generators have an efficiency of 90%, table 26.7 shows a
few ways of storing 100 GWh, for a range of height drops. (For the
physics behind this table, see this chapter’s endnotes.)

Ways to store 100 GWh[^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html)

drop from upper lake

working volume required (million m^3^)

example size of lake area  depth

500 m

40

 

2 km^2^×20 m [^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#192)

500 m

40

4 km^2^×10 m [^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#192)

200 m

100

5 km^2^×20 m [^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#192)

200 m

100

10 km^2^×10 m [^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#192)

100 m

200

10 km^2^×20 m [^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#192)

100 m

200

20 km^2^×10 m [^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#192)

Is it plausible that twelve such sites could be found? Certainly, we
could build several more sites like Dinorwig in Snowdonia alone. Table
26.8 shows two alternative sites near to Ffestiniog where two facilities
equal to Dinorwig could have been built. These sites were considered
alongside Dinorwig in the 1970s, and Dinorwig was chosen.

  proposed location   power (GW)   head (m)   volume (million m^3^)   energy stored (GWh)
  ------------------- ------------ ---------- ----------------------- ---------------------
  Bowydd              2.40         250        17.7                    12.0
  Croesor             1.35         310        8.0                     6.7

Pumped-storage facilities holding significantly more energy than
Dinorwig could be built in Scotland by upgrading existing hydroelectric
facilities. Scanning a map of Scotland, one candidate location would use
Loch Sloy as its upper lake and Loch Lomond as its lower lake. There is
already a small hydroelectric power station linking these lakes. Figure
26.9 shows these lakes and the Dinorwig lakes on the same scale. The
height

Table 26.7. Pumped storage. Ways to store 100 GWh. For comparison with
column 2, the working volume of Dinorwig is 7 million m^3^, and the
volume of Lake Windermere is 300 million m^3^. For comparison with
column 3, Rutland water has an area of 12.6 km^2^; Grafham water 7.4
km^2^. Carron valley reservoir is 3.9 km^2^. The largest lake in Great
Britain is Loch Lomond, with an area of 71 km^2^.

Table 26.8. Alternative sites for pumped storage facilities in
Snowdonia. At both these sites the lower lake would have been a new
artificial reservoir.

![](figure216.png)

difference between Loch Sloy and Loch Lomond is about 270 m. Sloy’s area
is about 1.5 km^2^, and it can already store an energy of 20 GWh. If
Loch Sloy’s dam were raised by another 40 m then the extra energy that
could be stored would be about 40 GWh. The water level in Loch Lomond
would change by at most 0.8 m during a cycle. This is less than the
normal range of annual water level variations of Loch Lomond (2 m).

Figure 26.10 shows 13 locations in Scotland with potential for pumped
storage. (Most of them already have a hydroelectric facility.) If ten of
these had the same potential as I just estimated for Loch Sloy, then we
could store 400 GWh – one third of the total of 1200 GWh that we were
aiming for.

We could scour the map of Britain for other locations. The best loca-
tions would be near to big wind farms. One idea would be to make a new
artificial lake in a hanging valley (across the mouth of which a dam
would

Figure 26.9. Dinorwig, in the Snowdonia National Park, compared with
Loch Sloy and Loch Lomond. The upper maps show 10 km by 10 km areas. In
the lower maps the blue grid is made of 1 km squares. Images produced
from Ordnance Survey’s Get-a-map service
www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/getamap. Images reproduced with permission of
Ordnance Survey. © Crown Copyright 2006.

![](figure430.png)

![](figure217.png)

be built) terminating above the sea, with the sea being used as the
lower lake.

Thinking further outside the box, one could imagine getting away from
lakes and reservoirs, putting half of the facility in an underground
cham- ber. A pumped-storage chamber one kilometre below London has been
mooted.

By building more pumped storage systems, it looks as if we could in-
crease our maximum energy store from 30 GWh to 100 GWh or perhaps 400
GWh. Achieving the full 1200 GWh that we were hoping for looks tough,
however. Fortunately there is another solution.

Demand management using electric vehicles
-----------------------------------------

To recap our requirements: we’d like to be able to store or do without
about 1200 GWh, which is 20 kWh per person; and to cope with swings in
supply of up to 33 GW – that’s 0.5 kW per person. These numbers are
delightfully similar in size to the energy and power requirements of
electric cars. The electric cars we saw in Chapter 20 had energy stores
of between 9 kWh and 53 kWh. A national fleet of 30 million electric
cars would store an energy similar to 20 kWh per person! Typical battery
chargers draw a power of 2 or 3 kW. So simultaneously switching on 30
million battery chargers would create a change in demand of about 60 GW!
The average power required to power all the nation’s transport, if it
were all electric, is roughly 40 or 50 GW. There’s therefore a close
match between the adoption of electric cars proposed in Chapter 20 and
the creation of roughly 33 GW

Figure 26.10. Lochs in Scotland with potential for pumped storage.

![](figure219.png)

Figure 26.11. Okinawa pumped-storage power plant, whose lower reservoir
is the ocean. Energy stored: 0.2 GWh. Photo by courtesy of J-Power.
www.ieahydro.org.

of wind capacity, delivering 10 GW of power on average.

Here’s one way this match could be exploited: electric cars could be
plugged in to smart chargers, at home or at work. These smart chargers
would be aware both of the value of electricity, and of the car user’s
requirements (for example, “my car must be fully charged by 7am on Mon-
day morning”). The charger would sensibly satisfy the user’s
requirements by guzzling electricity whenever the wind blows, and
switching off when the wind drops, or when other forms of demand
increase. These smart chargers would provide a useful service in
balancing to the grid, a service which could be rewarded financially.

We could have an especially robust solution if the cars’ batteries were
exchangeable. Imagine popping in to a filling station and slotting in a
set of fresh batteries in exchange for your exhausted batteries. The
filling station would be responsible for recharging the batteries; they
could do this at the perfect times, turning up and down their chargers
so that total supply and demand were always kept in balance. Using
exchangeable batteries is an especially robust solution because there
could be millions of spare batteries in the filling stations’
storerooms. These spare batteries would provide an extra buffer to help
us get through wind lulls. Some people say, “Horrors! How could I trust
the filling station to look after my batteries for me? What if they gave
me a duff one?” Well, you could equally well ask today “What if the
filling station gave me petrol laced with water?” Myself, I’d much
rather use a vehicle maintained by a professional than by a muppet like
me!

Let’s recap our options. We can balance fluctuating demand and fluctu-
ating supply by switching on and off power *generators* (waste
incinerators and hydroelectric stations, for example); by *storing*
energy somewhere and regenerating it when it’s needed; or by switching
*demand* off and on.

The most promising of these options, in terms of scale, is switching on
and off the power demand of electric-vehicle charging. 30 million cars,
with 40 kWh of associated batteries each (some of which might be ex-
changeable batteries sitting in filling stations) adds up to 1200 GWh.
If freight delivery were electrified too then the total storage capacity
would be bigger still.

There is thus a beautiful match between wind power and electric
vehicles. If we ramp up electric vehicles at the same time as ramping up
wind power, roughly 3000 new vehicles for every 3 MW wind turbine, and
if we ensure that the charging systems for the vehicles are smart, this
synergy would go a long way to solving the problem of wind fluctuations.
If my prediction about hydrogen vehicles is wrong, and hydrogen vehicles
turn out to be the low-energy vehicles of the future, then the
wind-with-electric- vehicles match-up that I’ve just described could of
course be replaced by a wind-with-hydrogen match-up. The wind turbines
would make electricity; and whenever electricity was plentiful, hydrogen
would be produced and stored in tanks, for subsequent use in vehicles or
in other applications,

such as glass production.

Other demand-management and storage ideas
-----------------------------------------

There are a few other demand-management and energy-storage options,
which we’ll survey now.

The idea of modifying the rate of production of stuff to match the power
of a renewable source is not new. Many aluminium production plants are
located close to hydroelectric power stations; the more it rains, the
more aluminium is produced. Wherever power is used to create stuff that
is storable, there’s potential for switching that power-demand on and
off in a smart way. For example, reverse-osmosis systems (which make
pure water from sea-water – see p92) are major power consumers in many
countries (though not Britain). Another storable product is heat. If, as
sug- gested in Chapter 21, we electrify buildings’ heating and cooling
systems, especially water-heating and air-heating, then there’s
potential for lots of easily-turn-off-and-onable power demand to be
attached to the grid. Well- insulated buildings hold their heat for many
hours, so there’s flexibility in the timing of their heating. Moreover,
we could include large thermal reservoirs in buildings, and use
heat-pumps to pump heat into or out of those reservoirs at times of
electricity abundance; then use a second set of heat pumps to deliver
heat or cold from the reservoirs to the places where heating or cooling
are wanted.

Controlling electricity demand automatically would be easy. The simp-
lest way to do this is to have devices such as fridges and freezers
listen to the frequency of the mains. When there is a shortage of power
on the grid, the frequency drops below its standard value of 50 Hz; when
there is a power excess, the frequency rises above 50 Hz. (It’s just
like a dynamo on a bicycle: when you switch the lights on, you have to
pedal harder to supply the extra power; if you don’t then the bike goes
a bit slower.) Fridges can be modified to nudge their internal
thermostats up and down just a little in response to the mains
frequency, in such a way that, without ever jeopardizing the temperature
of your butter, they tend to take power at times that help the grid.

Can demand-management provide a significant chunk of virtual storage?
How big a sink of power are the nation’s fridges? On average, a typical
fridge-freezer draws about 18 W; let’s guess that the number of fridges
is about 30million. So the ability to switch off all the nation’s
fridges for a few minutes would be equivalent to 0.54 GW of automatic
ad- justable power. This is quite a lot of electrical power – more than
1% of the national total – and it is similar in size to the sudden
increases in demand produced when the people, united in an act of
religious observance (such as watching EastEnders), simultaneously
switch on their kettles. Such “TV pick-ups” typically produce increases
of demand of 0.6–0.8 GW. Auto- matically switching off every fridge
would *nearly* cover these daily blips

of concerted kettle boiling. These smart fridges could also help iron
out short-time-scale fluctuations in wind power. The TV pick-ups
associated with the holiest acts of observance (for example, watching
England play footie against Sweden) can produce sudden increases in
demand of over 2 GW. On such occasions, electricity demand and supply
are kept in balance by unleashing the full might of Dinorwig.

To provide flexibility to the electricity-grid’s managers, who
perpetually turn power stations up and down to match supply to demand,
many industrial users of electricity are on special contracts that allow
the managers to switch off those users’ demand at very short notice. In
South Africa (where there are frequent electricity shortages),
radio-controlled demand-management systems are being installed in
hundreds of thousands of homes, to control air-conditioning systems and
electric water heaters.

### Denmark’s solution

Here’s how Denmark copes with the intermittency of its wind power. The
Danes effectively pay to use other countries’ hydroelectric facilities
as stor- age facilities. Almost all of Denmark’s wind power is exported
to its European neighbours, some of whom have hydroelectric power, which
they can turn down to balance things out. The saved hydroelectric power
is then sold back to the Danes (at a higher price) during the next
period of low wind and high demand. Overall, Danish wind is contributing
useful energy, and the system as a whole has considerable security
thanks to the capacity of the hydro system.

Could Britain adopt the Danish solution? We would need direct large-
capacity connections to countries with lots of turn-off-and-on-able
hydro- electric capacity; or a big connection to a Europe-wide
electricity grid.

Norway has 27.5 GW of hydroelectric capacity. Sweden has roughly 16 GW.
And Iceland has 1.8 GW. A 1.2 GW high-voltage DC interconnector to
Norway was mooted in 2003, but not built. A connection to the
Netherlands – the BritNed interconnector, with a capacity of 1 GW – will
be built in 2010. Denmark’s wind capacity is 3.1 GW, and it has a 1 GW
connection to Norway, 0.6 GW to Sweden, and 1.2 GW to Germany, a total
export capacity of 2.8 GW, very similar to its wind capacity. To be able
to export all its excess wind power in the style of Denmark, Britain
(assuming 33 GW of wind capacity) would need something like a 10 GW
connection to Norway, 8 GW to Sweden, and 1 GW to Iceland.

### A solution with two grids

A radical approach is to put wind power and other intermittent sources
onto a separate *second* electricity grid, used to power systems that
don’t re- quire reliable power, such as heating and electric vehicle
battery-charging.

![](figure221.png)

Figure 26.12. Electrical production and consumption on Fair Isle,
1995–96. All numbers are in kWh/d per person. Production exceeds
consumption because 0.6 kWh/d per person were dumped

For over 25 years (since 1982), the Scottish island of Fair Isle
(population 70, area 5.6 km^2^) has had two electricity networks that
distribute power from two wind turbines and, if necessary, a
diesel-powered electricity generator. Standard electricity service is
provided on one network, and electric heating is delivered by a second
set of cables. The electric heating is mainly served by excess
electricity from the wind-turbines that would otherwise have had to be
dumped. Remote frequency-sensitive programmable relays control
individual water heaters and storage heaters in the individual buildings
of the community. The mains frequency is used to inform heaters when
they may switch on. In fact there are up to six frequency channels per
household, so the system emulates seven grids. Fair Isle also
successfully trialled a kinetic-energy storage system (a flywheel) to
store energy during fluctuations of wind strength on a time-scale of 20
seconds.

### Electrical vehicles as generators

If 30 million electric vehicles were willing, in times of national
electricity shortage, to run their chargers in reverse and put power
back into the grid, then, at 2 kW per vehicle, we’d have a potential
power source of 60 GW – similar to the capacity of all the power
stations in the country. Even if only one third of the vehicles were
connected and available at one time, they’d still amount to a potential
source of 20 GW of power. If each of those vehicles made an emergency
donation of 2 kWh of energy – corresponding to perhaps 20% of its
battery’s energy-storage capacity – then the total energy provided by
the fleet would be 20 GWh – twice as much as the energy in the Dinorwig
pumped storage facility.

### Other storage technologies

There are lots of ways to store energy, and lots of criteria by which
storage solutions are judged. Figure 26.13 shows three of the most
important criteria: energy density (how much energy is stored per
kilogram of storage system); efficiency (how much energy you get back
per unit energy put in); and lifetime (how many cycles of energy storage
can be delivered before the system needs refurbishing). Other important
criteria are: the maximum rate at which energy can be pumped into or out
of the storage system, often expressed as a power per kg; the duration
for which energy stays stored in the system; and of course the cost and
safety of the system.

##### Flywheels

Figure 26.15 shows a monster flywheel used to supply brief bursts of
power of up to 0.4 GW to power an experimental facility. It weighs 800
t. Spinning at 225 revolutions per minute, it can store 1000 kWh, and
its en- ergy density is about 1 Wh per kg.

![](figure222.png)

Figure 26.15. One of the two flywheels at the fusion research facility
in Culham, under construction. Photo: EFDA-JET. www.jet.efda.org.

![](figure220.png)

fuel

calorific value

(kWh/kg)

(MJ/l)

propane

13.8

25.4

petrol

13.0

34.7

diesel oil (DERV)

12.7

37.9

kerosene

12.8

37

heating oil

12.8

37.3

ethanol

8.2

23.4

methanol

5.5

18.0

bioethanol

21.6

coal

8.0

firewood

4.4

hydrogen

39.0

natural gas

14.85

0.04

  battery type          energy density (Wh/kg)   lifetime (cycles)
  --------------------- ------------------------ -------------------
  nickel-cadmium        45–80                    1500
  NiMH                  60–120                   300–500
  lead-acid             30–50                    200–300
  lithium-ion           110–160                  300–500
  lithium-ion-polymer   100–130                  300–500
  reusable alkaline     80                       50

​(a) (b)

A flywheel system designed for energy storage in a racing car can store
400 kJ (0.1 kWh) of energy and weighs 24 kg (p126). That’s an energy
den- sity of 4.6 Wh per kg.

High-speed flywheels made of composite materials have energy densi- ties
up to 100 Wh/kg.

##### Supercapacitors

Supercapacitors are used to store small amounts of electrical energy (up
to 1 kWh) where many cycles of operation are required, and charging must
be completed quickly. For example, supercapacitors are favoured over
batteries for regenerative braking in vehicles that do many stops and
starts. You can buy supercapacitors with an energy density of 6 Wh/kg.

A US company, EEStor, claims to be able to make much better super-
capacitors, using barium titanate, with an energy density of 280 Wh/kg.

Figure 26.13. Some properties of storage systems and fuels. (a) Energy
density (on a logarithmic scale) versus lifetime (number of cycles). (b)
Energy density versus efficiency. The energy densities don’t include the
masses of the energy systems’ containers, except in the case of “air”
(compressed air storage). Taking into account the weight of a cryogenic
tank for holding hydrogen, the energy density of hydrogen is
reduced[^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#199) 39
000Wh/kg to roughly 2400 Wh/kg.

Table 26.14. (a) Calorific values (energy densities, per kg and per
litre) of some fuels (in kWh per kg and MJ per litre). (b) Energy
density of some batteries (in Wh per kg). 1 kWh = 1000Wh.

##### Vanadium flow batteries

VRB power systems have provided a 12 MWh energy storage system for the
Sorne Hill wind farm in Ireland, whose current capacity is “32 MW,”
increasing to “39 MW.” (VRB stands for vanadium redox battery.) This
storage system is a big “flow battery,” a redox regenerative fuel cell,
with a couple of tanks full of vanadium in different chemical states.
This storage system can smooth the output of its wind farm on a
time-scale of minutes, but the longest time for which it could deliver
one third of the capacity (during a lull in the wind) is one hour.

A 1.5 MWh vanadium system costing \$480 000 occupies 70 m^2^ with a mass
of 107 tons. The vanadium redox battery has a life of more than 10 000
cycles. It can be charged at the same rate that it is discharged (in
contrast to lead-acid batteries which must be charged 5 times as
slowly). Its efficiency is 70–75%, round-trip. The volume required is
about 1 m^3^ of 2-molar vanadium in sulphuric acid to store 20 kWh.
(That’s 20 Wh/kg.)

So to store 10 GWh would require 500 000 m^3^ (170 swimming pools) – for
example, tanks 2 m high covering a floor area of 500 m × 500 m.

Scaling up the vanadium technology to match a big pumped-storage system
– 10 GWh – might have a noticeable effect on the world vanadium market,
but there is no long-term shortage of vanadium. Current worldwide
production of vanadium is 40 000 tons per year. A 10 GWh system would
contain 36 000 tons of vanadium – about one year’s worth of current
production. Vanadium is currently produced as a by-product of other pro-
cesses, and the total world vanadium resource is estimated to be 63
million tons.

### “Economical” solutions

In the present world which doesn’t put any cost on carbon pollution, the
financial bar that a storage system must beat is an ugly alternative:
storage can be emulated by simply putting up an extra gas-fired power
station to meet extra demand, and shedding any excess electrical power
by throwing it away in heaters.

Seasonal fluctuations
---------------------

The fluctuations of supply and demand that have the longest timescale
are seasonal. The most important fluctuation is that of
building-heating, which goes up every winter. Current UK natural gas
demand varies throughout the year, from a typical average of 36 kWh/d
per person in July and August to an average of 72 kWh/d per person in
December to February, with extremes of 30–80 kWh/d/p (figure 26.16).

Some renewables also have yearly fluctuations – solar power is stronger
in summer and wind power is weaker.

![](figure223.png)

Figure 26.16. Gas demand (lower graph) and temperature (upper graph) in
Britain during 2007.

How to ride through these very-long-timescale fluctuations? Electric
vehicles and pumped storage are not going to help store the sort of
quantities required. A useful technology will surely be long-term
thermal storage. A big rock or a big vat of water can store a winter’s
worth of heat for a building – Chapter E discusses this idea in more
detail. In the Netherlands, summer heat from roads is stored in aquifers
until the winter; and delivered to buildings via heat pumps [2wmuw7].

Notes
-----

page no.

187*The total output of the wind fleet of the Republic of Ireland.* Data
from eirgrid.com [2hxf6c].

–*“Loss of wind causes Texas power grid emergency”.* [2l99ht] Actually,
my reading of this news article is that this event, albeit unusual, was
an example of normal power grid operation. The grid has industrial
customers whose supply is interruptible, in the event of a mismatch
between supply and demand. Wind output dropped by 1.4 GW at the same
time that Texans’ demand increased by 4.4 GW, causing exactly such a
mismatch between supply and demand. The interruptible supplies were
interrupted. Everything worked as intended. Here is another example,
where better power-system planning would have helped: “Spain wind power
hits record, cut ordered.” [3x2kvv] Spain’s av- erage electricity
consumption is 31 GW. On Tuesday 4th March 2008, its wind generators
were delivering 10 GW. “Spain’s power market has become particularly
sensitive to fluctuations in wind.”

–*Supporters of wind energy play down this problem: “Don’t worry –
individual wind farms may be intermittent, but taken together, the sum
of all wind farms is much less intermittent.”* For an example, see the
website yes2wind.com, which, on its page “debunking the myth that wind
power isn’t reliable” asserts that “the variation in output from wind
farms dis- tributed around the country is scarcely noticeable.”
www.yes2wind.com/ intermittency debunk.html

–*...wind is intermittent, even if we add up lots of turbines covering a
whole country. The UK is a bit larger than Ireland, but the same problem
holds there too.* Source: Oswald et al. (2008).

191*Dinorwig’s pumped-storage efficiency is 75%.* Figure 26.17 shows
data. Further information about Dinorwig and the alternate sites for
pumped stor- age: Baines et al. (1983, 1986).

192*Table 26.7.* The working volume required, *V*, is computed from the
height drop *h* as follows. If *ε* is the efficiency of potential energy
to electricity conversion,

*V* = 100 GWh/(*ρghε*),

where *ρ* is the density of water and *g* is the acceleration of
gravity. I assumed the generators have an efficiency of *ε* = 0.9.

![](figure224.png)

Figure 26.17. Efficiency of the four pumped storage systems of Britain.

192*Table 26.8, Alternative sites for pumped storage facilities.* The
proposed upper reservoir for Bowydd was Llyn Newydd, grid reference SH
722 470; for Croesor: Llyn Cwm-y-Foel, SH 653 466.

193*If ten Scottish pumped storage facilities had the same potential as
Loch Sloy, then we could store 400 GWh.* This rough estimate is backed
up by a study by Strathclyde University [5o2xgu] which lists 14 sites
having an estimated storage capacity of 514 GWh.

196*Fridges can be modified to nudge their internal thermostats up and
down . . . in response to the mains frequency.* [2n3pmb] Further links:
Dynamic De- mand www.dynamicdemand.co.uk; www.rltec.com;
www.responsiveload.com.

197*In South Africa... demand-management systems are being installed.*
Source: [2k8h4o]

–*Almost all of Denmark’s wind power is exported to its European
neighbours.* Source: Sharman (2005).

198*For over 25 years (since 1982), Fair Isle has had two electricity
networks.* www.fairisle.org.uk/FIECo/ Wind speeds are between 3 m/s and
16 m/s most of the time; 7 m/s is the most probable speed.

199*Figure 26.13. Storage efficiencies.* Lithium-ion batteries: 88%
efficient. Source: www.national.com/appinfo/power/files/swcap eet.pdf
Lead-acid batteries: 85–95%. Source: www.windsun.com/Batteries/Battery
FAQ.htm Compressed air storage: 18% efficient. Source: Lemofouet-Gatsi
and Rufer (2005); Lemofouet-Gatsi (2006). See also Denholm et al.
(2005). Air/oil: hydraulic accumulators, as used for regenerative
braking in trucks, are compressed-air storage devices that can be
90%-efficient round-trip and allow 70% of kinetic energy to be captured.
Sources: Lemofouet-Gatsi (2006), [5cp27j].

–*Table 26.14.* Sources: Xtronics xtronics.com/reference/energy
density.htm; Battery University [2sxlyj]; flywheel information from
Ruddell (2003). The latest batteries with highest energy density are
lithium-sulphur and lithium-sulphide batteries, which have an energy
density of 300 Wh/kg. Some disillusioned hydrogen-enthusiasts seem to be
making their way up the periodic table and becoming boron- enthusiasts.
Boron (assuming you will burn it to B2O3) has an energy density of 15
000Wh per kg, which is nice and high. But I imagine that my main concern
about hydrogen will apply to boron too: that the production of the fuel
(here, boron from boron oxide) will be inefficient in energy terms, and
so will the combustion process.

200*Vanadium flow batteries.* Sources: www.vrbpower.com; *Ireland wind
farm* [ktd7a]; *charging rate* [627ced]; *worldwide production*
[5fasl7].

201*... summer heat from roads is stored in aquifers...* [2wmuw7].

![](figure225.png)

Figure 26.18. A possible site for another 7 GWh pumped storage facility.
Croesor valley is in the centre-left, between the sharp peak (Cnicht) on
the left and the broader peaks (the Moelwyns) on the right.

27   Five energy plans for Britain {.darkblue}
==================================

If we are to get off our current fossil fuel addiction we need a plan
for radical action. And the plan needs to add up. The plan also needs a
political and financial roadmap. Politics and economics are not part of
this book’s brief, so here I will simply discuss what the technical side
of a plan that adds up might look like.

There are many plans that add up. In this chapter I will describe five.
Please don’t take any of the plans I present as “the author’s
recommended solution.” My sole recommendation is this:

> Make sure your policies include a plan that adds up!

Each plan has a consumption side and a production side: we have to
specify how much power our country will be consuming, and how that power
is to be produced. To avoid the plans’ taking many pages, I deal with a
cartoon of our country, in which we consume power in just three forms:
transport, heating, and electricity. This is a drastic simplification,
omitting industry, farming, food, imports, and so forth. But I hope it’s
a helpful simplification, allowing us to compare and contrast
alternative plans in one minute. Eventually we’ll need more detailed
plans, but today, we are so far from our destination that I think a
simple cartoon is the best way to capture the issues.

I’ll present a few plans that I believe are technically feasible for the
UK by 2050. All will share the same consumption side. I emphasize again,
this doesn’t mean that I think this is the correct plan for consumption,
or the only plan. I just want to avoid overwhelming you with a
proliferation of plans. On the production side, I will describe a range
of plans using different mixes of renewables, “clean coal,” and nuclear
power.

The current situation
---------------------

The current situation in our cartoon country is as follows. Transport
(of both humans and stuff) uses 40 kWh/d per person. Most of that energy
is currently consumed as petrol, diesel, or kerosene. Heating of air and
water uses 40 kWh/d per person. Much of that energy is currently
provided by natural gas. Delivered electricity amounts to 18 kWh/d/p and
uses fuel (mainly coal, gas, and nuclear) with an energy content of 45
kWh/d/p. The remaining 27 kWh/d/p goes up cooling towers (25 kWh/d/p)
and is lost in the wires of the distribution network (2 kWh/d/p). The
total energy input to this present-day cartoon country is 125 kWh/d per
person.

![](figure226.png)

Common features of all five plans
---------------------------------

In my future cartoon country, the energy consumption is reduced by using
more efficient technology for transport and heating.

In the five plans for the future, transport is largely electrified.
Electric engines are more efficient than petrol engines, so the energy
required for transport is reduced. Public transport (also largely
electrified) is better integrated, better personalized, and better
patronized. I’ve assumed that electrification makes transport about four
times more efficient, and that economic growth cancels out some of these
savings, so that the net effect is a halving of energy consumption for
transport. There are a few essential vehicles that can’t be easily
electrified, and for those we make our own liquid fuels (for example
biodiesel or biomethanol or cellulosic

Figure 27.1. Current consumption per person in “cartoon Britain 2008”
(left two columns), and a future consumption plan, along with a possible
breakdown of fuels (right two columns). This plan requires that
electricity supply be increased from 18 to 48 kWh/d per person of
electricity.

bioethanol). The energy for transport is 18 kWh/d/p of electricity and 2
kWh/d/p of liquid fuels. The electric vehicles’ batteries serve as an
energy storage facility, helping to cope with fluctuations of
electricity supply and demand. The area required for the biofuel
production is about 12% of the UK (500 m^2^ per person), assuming that
biofuel production comes from 1%-efficient plants and that conversion of
plant to fuel is 33% efficient. Alternatively, the biofuels could be
imported if we could persuade other countries to devote the required
(Wales-sized) area of agricultural land to biofuels for us.

In all five plans, the energy consumption of **heating** is reduced by
im- proving the insulation of all buildings, and improving the control
of tem- perature (through thermostats, education, and the promotion of
sweater- wearing by sexy personalities). New buildings (all those built
from 2010 onwards) are really well insulated and require almost no space
heating. Old buildings (which will still dominate in 2050) are mainly
heated by air- source heat pumps and ground-source heat pumps. Some
water heating is delivered by solar panels (2.5 square metres on every
house), some by heat pumps, and some by electricity. Some buildings
located near to managed forests and energy-crop plantations are heated
by biomass. The power re- quired for heating is thus reduced from 40
kWh/d/p to 12 kWh/d/p of electricity, 2
kWh/d/p[^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#205) of solar
hot water, and 5 kWh/d/p of wood.

The wood for making heat (or possibly combined heat and power) comes
from nearby forests and energy crops (perhaps miscanthus grass, willow,
or poplar) covering a land area of 30 000 km^2^, or 500 m^2^ per person;
this corresponds to 18% of the UK’s agricultural land, which has an area
of 2800 m^2^ per person. The energy crops are grown mainly on the lower-
grade land, leaving the higher-grade land for food-farming. Each 500
m^2^ of energy crops yields 0.5 oven dry tons per year, which has an
energy content of about 7 kWh/d; of this power, about 30% is lost in the
process of heat production and delivery. The final heat delivered is 5
kWh/d per person.

In these plans, I assume the current demand for **electricity** for
gadgets, light, and so forth is maintained. So we still require 18
kWh(e)/d/p of electricity. Yes, lighting efficiency is improved by a
switch to light-emitting diodes for most lighting, and many other
gadgets will get more efficient; but thanks to the blessings of economic
growth, we’ll have increased the number of gadgets in our lives – for
example video-conferencing systems to help us travel less.

The total consumption of electricity under this plan goes up (because of
the 18 kWh/d/p for electric transport and the 12 kWh/d/p for heat pumps)
to 48 kWh/d/p (or 120 GW nationally). This is nearly a tripling of UK
electricity consumption. Where’s that energy to come from? Let’s
describe some alternatives. Not all of these alternatives are
“sustainable” as defined in this book; but they are all low-carbon
plans.

Producing lots of electricity – the components
----------------------------------------------

To make lots of electricity, each plan uses some amount of onshore and
off- shore wind; some solar photovoltaics; possibly some solar power
bought from countries with deserts; waste incineration (including refuse
and agri- cultural waste); hydroelectricity (the same amount as we get
today); perhaps wave power; tidal barrages, tidal lagoons, and tidal
stream power; perhaps nuclear power; and perhaps some “clean fossil
fuel,” that is, coal burnt in power stations that do carbon capture and
storage. Each plan aims for a total electricity production of 50 kWh/d/p
on average – I got this figure by rounding up the 48 kWh/d/p of average
demand, allowing for some loss in the distribution network.

Some of the plans that follow will import power from other countries.
For comparison, it may be helpful to know how much of our current power
is imported today. The answer is that, in 2006, the UK imported 28
kWh/d/p of fuel – 23% of its primary consumption. These imports are
dominated by coal (18 kWh/d/p), crude oil (5 kWh/d/p), and natural gas
(6 kWh/d/p). Nuclear fuel (uranium) is not usually counted as an import
since it’s easily stored.

In all five plans I will assume that we scale up municipal waste in-
cineration so that almost all waste that can’t usefully be recycled is
in- cinerated rather than landfilled. Incinerating 1 kg per day per
person of waste yields roughly 0.5 kWh/d per person of electricity. I’ll
assume that a similar amount of agricultural waste is also incinerated,
yielding 0.6 kWh/d/p. Incinerating this waste requires roughly 3 GW of
waste-to- energy capacity, a ten-fold increase over the incinerating
power stations of 2008 (figure 27.2). London (7 million people) would
have twelve 30-MW waste-to-energy plants like the SELCHP plant in South
London (see p 287). Birmingham (1 million people) would have two of
them. Every town of 200 000 people would have a 10 MW waste-to-energy
plant. Any fears that waste incineration at this scale would be
difficult, dirty, or dangerous should be allayed by figure 27.3, which
shows that many countries in Europe incinerate *far* more waste per
person than the UK; these incineration-loving countries include Germany,
Sweden, Denmark, the Netherlands, and Switzerland – not usually nations
associated with hygiene problems! One good side-effect of this waste
incineration plan is that it eliminates future methane emissions from
landfill sites.

In all five plans, hydroelectricity contributes 0.2 kWh/d/p, the same as
today.

Electric vehicles are used as a dynamically-adjustable load on the elec-
tricity network. The average power required to charge the electric
vehicles is 45 GW (18 kWh/d/p). So fluctuations in renewables such as
solar and wind can be balanced by turning up and down this load, as long
as the fluctuations are not too big or lengthy. Daily swings in
electricity demand are going to be bigger than they are today because of
the replacement of

![](figure228.png)

Figure 27.2. Waste-to-energy facilities in Britain. The line shows the
average power production assuming 1 kg of waste → 0.5 kWh of
electricity.

![](figure227.png)

gas for cooking and heating by electricity (see figure 26.16, p200). To
ensure that surges in demand of 10 GW lasting up to 5 hours can be
covered, all the plans would build five new pumped storage facilities
like Dinorwig (or upgrade hydroelectric facilities to provide pumped
storage). 50 GWh of storage is equal to five Dinorwigs, each with a
capacity of 2 GW. Some of the plans that follow will require extra
pumped storage beyond this. For additional insurance, all the plans
would build an electricity interconnector to Norway, with a capacity of
2 GW.

Producing lots of electricity – plan D
--------------------------------------

Plan D (“D” stands for “domestic diversity”) uses a lot of every
possible domestic source of electricity, and depends relatively little
on energy supply from other countries.

Here’s where plan D gets its 50 kWh/d/p of electricity from. Wind: 8
kWh/d/p (20 GW average; 66 GW peak) (plus about 400 GWh of assoc- iated
pumped storage facilities). Solar PV: 3 kWh/d/p. Waste incineration:
1.3[^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#207) kWh/d/p.
Hydroelectricity: 0.2 kWh/d/p. Wave: 2 kWh/d/p. Tide: 3.7 kWh/d/p.
Nuclear: 16 kWh/d/p (40 GW). “Clean coal”: 16 kWh/d/p (40 GW).

Figure 27.3. Left: Municipal solid waste put into landfill, versus
amount incinerated, in kg per day per person, by country. Right: Amount
of waste recycled versus amount landfilled or incinerated. Percentage of
waste recycled is given beside each country’s name.

To get 8 kWh/d/p of wind requires a 30-fold increase in wind power over
the installed power in 2008. Britain would have nearly 3 times as much
wind hardware as Germany has now. Installing this much windpower
offshore over a period of 10 years would require roughly 50 jack-up
barges.

Getting 3 kWh/d/p from solar photovoltaics requires 6 m^2^ of 20%-
efficient panels per person. Most south-facing roofs would have to be
completely covered with panels; alternatively, it might be more
economical, and cause less distress to the League for the Preservation
of Old Buildings, to plant many of these panels in the countryside in
the traditional Bavarian manner (figure 6.7, p41).

The waste incineration corresponds to 1 kg per day per person of domes-
tic waste (yielding 0.5 kWh/d/p) and a similar amount of agricultural
waste yielding 0.6 kWh/d/p; the hydroelectricity is 0.2 kWh/d/p, the
same amount as we get from hydro today.

The wave power requires 16 000 Pelamis deep-sea wave devices occu- pying
830 km of Atlantic coastline (see the map on p73). The tide power comes
from 5 GW of tidal stream installations, a 2 GW Severn barrage, and 2.5
GW of tidal lagoons, which can serve as pumped storage systems too.

To get 16 kWh/d/p of nuclear power requires 40 GW of nukes, which is a
roughly four-fold increase of the 2007 nuclear fleet. If we produced 16
kWh/d/p of nuclear power, we’d lie between Belgium, Finland, France and
Sweden, in terms of per-capita production: Belgium and Finland each
produce roughly 12 kWh/d/p; France and Sweden produce 19 kWh/d/p and 20
kWh/d/p respectively.

To get 16 kWh/d/p of “clean coal” (40 GW), we would have to take the
current fleet of coal stations, which deliver about 30 GW, retrofit
carbon- capture systems to them, which would reduce their output to 22
GW, then build another 18 GW of new clean-coal stations. This level of
coal power requires an energy input of about 53 kWh/d/p of coal, which
is a little big- ger than the total rate at which we currently burn
*all* fossil fuels at power stations, and well above the level we
estimated as being “sustainable” in Chapter 23. This rate of consumption
of coal is roughly three times the current rate of coal imports (18
kWh/d/p). If we didn’t reopen UK coal mines, this plan would have 32% of
UK electricity depending on imported coal. Reopened UK coal mines could
deliver an energy input of about 8 kWh/d/p, so either way, the UK would
not be self-sufficient for coal.

Do any features of this plan strike you as unreasonable or
objectionable? If so, perhaps one of the next four plans is more to your
liking.

Producing lots of electricity – plan N
--------------------------------------

Plan N is the “NIMBY” plan, for people who don’t like industrializing
the British countryside with renewable energy facilities, and who don’t
want

![](figure229.png)

Figure 27.4. Plan D

new nuclear power stations either. Let’s reveal the plan in stages.

First, we turn down all the renewable knobs from their very high set-
tings in plan D to: wind: 2 kWh/d/p (5 GW average); solar PV: 0; wave:
0; tide: 1 kWh/d/p.

We’ve just lost ourselves 14 kWh/d/p (35 GW nationally) by turning down
the renewables. (Don’t misunderstand! Wind is still eight-fold increased
over its 2008 levels.)

In the NIMBY plan, we reduce the contribution of nuclear power to 10
kWh/d/p (25 GW) – a reduction by 15 GW compared to plan D, but still a
substantial increase over today’s levels. 25 GW of nuclear power could,
I think, be squeezed onto the existing nuclear sites, so as to avoid
imposing on any new back yards. I left the clean-coal contribution
unchanged at 16 kWh/d/p (40 GW). The electricity contributions of
hydroelectricity and waste incineration remain the same as in plan D.

Where are we going to get an extra 50 GW from? The NIMBY says, “not in
my back yard, but in someone else’s.” Thus the NIMBY plan pays other
countries for imports of solar power from their deserts to the tune of
20 kWh/d/p (50 GW).

This plan requires the creation of five blobs each the size of London
(44 km in diameter) in the transmediterranean desert, filled with solar
power stations. It also requires power transmission systems to get 50 GW
of power up to the UK. Today’s high voltage electricity connection from
France can deliver only 2 GW of power. So this plan requires a 25-fold
increase in the capacity of the electricity connection from the
continent. (Or an equivalent power-transport solution – perhaps ships
filled with methanol or boron plying their way from desert shores.)

Having less wind power, plan N doesn’t need to build in Britain the
extra pumped-storage facilities mentioned in plan D, but given its
depen- dence on sunshine, it still requires storage systems to be built
somewhere to store energy from the fluctuating sun. Molten salt storage
systems at the solar power stations are one option. Tapping into pumped
storage systems in the Alps might also be possible. Converting the
electricity to a storable fuel such as methanol is another option,
though conversions entail losses and thus require more solar power
stations.

This plan gets 32% + 40% = 72% of the UK’s electricity from other
countries.

Producing lots of electricity – plan L
--------------------------------------

Some people say “we don’t want nuclear power!” How can we satisfy them?
Perhaps it should be the job of this anti-nuclear bunch to persuade the
NIMBY bunch that they do want renewable energy in our back yard after
all.

We can create a nuclear-free plan by taking plan D, keeping all those
renewables in our back yard, and doing a straight swap of nuclear for

![](figure230.png)

Figure 27.5. Plan N

![](figure231.png)

Figure 27.6. Plan L

desert power. As in plan N, the delivery of desert power requires a
large increase in transmission systems between North Africa and Britain;
the Europe–UK interconnectors would need to be increased from 2 GW to at
least 40 GW.

Here’s where plan L gets its 50 kWh/d/p of electricity from. Wind: 8
kWh/d/p (20 GW average) (plus about 400 GWh of associated pumped storage
facilities). Solar PV: 3 kWh/d/p. Hydroelectricity and waste in-
cineration: 1.3 kWh/d/p. Wave: 2 kWh/d/p. Tide: 3.7 kWh/d/p. “Clean
coal”: 16 kWh/d/p (40 GW). Solar power in deserts: 16 kWh/d/p (40 GW
average power).

This plan imports 64% of UK electricity from other countries.

I call this “plan L” because it aligns fairly well with the policies of
the Liberal Democrats – at least it did when I first wrote this chapter
in mid- 2007; recently, they’ve been talking about “real energy
independence for the UK,” and have announced a zero-carbon policy, under
which Britain would be a net energy *exporter*; their policy does not
detail how these targets would be met.

Producing lots of electricity – plan G
--------------------------------------

Some people say “we don’t want nuclear power, *and* we don’t want coal!”
It sounds a desirable goal, but we need a plan to deliver it. I call
this “plan G,” because I guess the Green Party don’t want nuclear or
coal, though I think not all Greens would like the rest of the plan.
Greenpeace, I know, *love* wind, so plan G is dedicated to them too,
because it has *lots* of wind.

I make plan G by starting again from plan D, nudging up the wave
contribution by 1 kWh/d/p (by pumping money into wave research and
increasing the efficiency of the Pelamis converter) and bumping up wind
power fourfold (relative to plan D) to 32 kWh/d/p, so that wind delivers
64% of all the electricity. This is a 120-fold increase of British wind
power over today’s levels. Under this plan, *world* wind power in 2008
is multiplied by 4, with all of the increase being placed on or around
the British Isles.

The immense dependence of plan G on renewables, especially wind, creates
difficulties for our main method of balancing supply and demand, namely
adjusting the charging rate of millions of rechargeable batteries for
transport. So in plan G we have to include substantial additional
pumped- storage facilities, capable of balancing out the fluctuations in
wind on a timescale of days. Pumped-storage facilities equal to 400
Dinorwigs can completely replace wind for a national lull lasting 2
days. Roughly 100 of Britain’s major lakes and lochs would be required
for the associated pumped-storage systems.

Plan G’s electricity breaks down as follows. Wind: 32 kWh/d/p (80 GW
average) (plus about 4000 GWh of associated pumped-storage facilities).
Solar photovoltaics: 3 kWh/d/p. Hydroelectricity and waste incineration:

![](figure232.png)

Figure 27.7. Plan G

1.3 kWh/d/p. Wave: 3 kWh/d/p. Tide: 3.7 kWh/d/p. Solar power in deserts:
7 kWh/d/p (17 GW).

This plan gets 14% of its electricity from other countries.

Producing lots of electricity – plan E
--------------------------------------

E stands for “economics.” This fifth plan is a rough guess for what
might happen in a liberated energy market with a strong carbon price. On
a level economic playing field with a strong price signal preventing the
emission of CO~2~, we don’t expect a diverse solution with a wide range
of power- costs; rather, we expect an economically optimal solution that
delivers the required power at the lowest cost. And when “clean coal”
and nuclear go head to head on price, it’s nuclear that wins. (Engineers
at a UK electricity generator told me that the capital cost of regular
dirty coal power stations is £1 billion per GW, about the same as
nuclear; but the capital cost of “clean-coal” power, including carbon
capture and storage, is roughly £2 billion per GW.) I’ve assumed that
solar power in other people’s deserts loses to nuclear power when we
take into account the cost of the required 2000-km-long transmission
lines (though van Voorthuysen (2008) reckons that with
Nobel-prize-worthy developments in solar-powered production of chemical
fuels, solar power in deserts would be the economic equal of nuclear
power). Offshore wind also loses to nuclear, but I’ve assumed that
onshore wind costs about the same as nuclear.

Here’s where plan E gets its 50 kWh/d/p of electricity from. Wind: 4
kWh/d/p (10 GW average). Solar PV: 0. Hydroelectricity and waste
incineration: 1.3 kWh/d/p. Wave: 0. Tide: 0.7 kWh/d/p. And nuclear: 44
kWh/d/p (110 GW).

This plan has a ten-fold increase in our nuclear power over 2007 levels.
Britain would have 110 GW, which is roughly double France’s nuclear
fleet. I included a little tidal power because I believe a well-designed
tidal lagoon facility can compete with nuclear power.

In this plan, Britain has no energy imports (except for the uranium,
which, as we said before, is not conventionally counted as an import).

Figure 27.9 shows all five plans.

How these plans relate to carbon-sucking and air travel
-------------------------------------------------------

In a future world where carbon pollution is priced appropriately to
prevent catastrophic climate change, we will be interested in any power
scheme that can at low cost put extra carbon down a hole in the ground.
Such carbon-neutralization schemes might permit us to continue flying at
2004 levels (while oil lasts). In 2004, average UK emissions of CO~2~
from flying were about 0.5 t CO~2~ per year per person. Accounting for
the full green- house impact of flying, perhaps the effective emissions
were about 1 t CO~2~e per year per person. Now, in all five of these
plans I assumed that one

![](figure234.png)

Figure 27.8. Plan E

1 t CO~2~e means greenhouse-gas emissions equivalent to one ton of
CO~2~.

![](figure233.png)

eighth of the UK was devoted to the production of energy crops which
were then used for heating or for combined heat and power. If instead we
directed all these crops to power stations with carbon capture and
storage – the “clean-coal” plants that featured in three of the plans –
then the amount of extra CO~2~ captured would be about 1 t of CO~2~ per
year per person. If the municipal and agricultural waste incinerators
were located at clean-coal plants too so that they could share the same
chimney, perhaps the total captured could be increased to 2 t CO~2~ per
year per person. This arrangement would have additional costs: the
biomass and waste might have to be transported further; the
carbon-capture process would require a significant fraction of the
energy from the crops; and the lost building- heating would have to be
replaced by more air-source heat pumps. But, if carbon-neutrality is our
aim, it would be worth planning ahead by seeking to locate new
clean-coal plants with waste incinerators in regions close to potential
biomass plantations.

“All these plans are absurd!”
-----------------------------

If you don’t like these plans, I’m not surprised. I agree that there is
something unpalatable about every one of them. Feel free to make another
plan that is more to your liking. But make sure it adds up!

Figure 27.9. All five plans.

Perhaps you will conclude that a viable plan has to involve less power
consumption per capita. I might agree with that, but it’s a difficult
policy to sell – recall Tony Blair’s response (p222) when someone
suggested he should fly overseas for holidays less frequently!

Alternatively, you may conclude that we have too high a population
density, and that a viable plan requires fewer people. Again, a
difficult policy to sell.

Notes and further reading
-------------------------

page no.

206*Incinerating 1 kg of waste yields roughly 0.5 kWh of electricity.*
The calorific value of municipal solid waste is about 2.6 kWh per kg;
power stations burning waste produce electricity with an efficiency of
about 20%. Source: SELCHP tour guide.

207*Figure 27.3.* Data from Eurostat, www.epa.gov, and
www.esrcsocietytoday. ac.uk/ESRCInfoCentre/.

210*The policies of the Liberal Democrats.* See www.libdems.org.uk:
[5os7dy], [yrw2oo].

28   Putting costs in perspective {.darkblue}
=================================

A plan on a map
---------------

Let me try to make clear the scale of the previous chapter’s plans by
show- ing you a map of Britain bearing a sixth plan. This sixth plan
lies roughly in the middle of the first five, so I call it plan M
(figure 28.1).

The areas and rough costs of these facilities are shown in table 28.3.
For simplicity, the financial costs are estimated using today’s prices
for comparable facilities, many of which are early prototypes. We can
expect many of the prices to drop significantly. The rough costs given
here are the building costs, and don’t include running costs or
decommissioning costs. The “per person” costs are found by dividing the
total cost by 60 million. Please remember, this is not a book about
economics – that would require another 400 pages! I’m providing these
cost estimates only to give a rough indication of the price tag we
should expect to see on a plan that adds up.

I’d like to emphasize that I am not advocating this particular plan – it
includes several features that I, as dictator of Britain, would not
select. I’ve deliberately included all available technologies, so that
you can try out your own plans with other mixes.

For example, if you say “photovoltaics are going to be too expensive,
I’d like a plan with more wave power instead,” you can see how to do it:
you need to increase the wave farms eight-fold. If you don’t like the
wind farms’ locations, feel free to move them (but where to?). Bear in
mind that putting more of them offshore will increase costs. If you’d
like fewer wind farms, no problem – just specify which of the other
technologies you’d like instead. You can replace five of the 100 km^2^
wind farms by adding one more 1 GW nuclear power station, for example.

Perhaps you think that this plan (like each of the five plans in the
previ- ous chapter) devotes unreasonably large areas to biofuels. Fine:
you may therefore conclude that the demand for liquid fuels for
transport must be reduced below the 2 kWh per day per person that this
plan assumed; or that liquid fuels must be created in some other way.

Cost of switching from fossil fuels to renewables
-------------------------------------------------

Every wind farm costs a few million pounds to build and delivers a few
megawatts. As a very rough ballpark figure in 2008, installing one watt
of capacity costs one pound; one kilowatt costs 1000 pounds; a megawatt
of wind costs a million; a gigawatt of nuclear costs a billion or
perhaps two. Other renewables are more expensive. We (the UK) currently
consume a total power of roughly 300 GW, most of which is fossil fuel.
So we can anticipate that a major switching from fossil fuel to
renewables and/or nu- clear is going to require roughly 300 GW of
renewables and/or nuclear and

![](figure236.png)

Figure 28.1. Plan M

Capacity

Rough cost total

per person

Average power delivered

52 onshore wind farms: 5200 km^2^

35 GW

£27bn

£450

4.2 kWh/d/p

–based on Lewis wind farm

29 offshore wind farms: 2900 km^2^

29 GW

£36bn

£650

3.5 kWh/d/p

– based on Kentish Flats, & including £3bn investment in jack-up barges.

Pumped storage:    15 facilities similar to Dinorwig

30 GW

£15bn

£250

Photovoltaic farms: 1000 km^2^

48 GW

£190bn

£3200

2 kWh/d/p

– based on Solarpark in Bavaria

Solar hot water panels:    1 m^2^ of roof-mounted panel    per person.
(60 km^2^ total)

2.5 GW(th) average

£72bn

£1200

1 kWh/d/p

Waste incinerators:    100 new 30 MW incinerators

3 GW

£8.5bn

£140

1.1 kWh/d/p

– based on SELCHP

Heat pumps

210 GW(th)

£60bn

£1000

12 kWh/d/p

Wave farms – 2500 Pelamis,    130 km of sea

1.9 GW (0.76 GW average)

£6bn?

£100

0.3 kWh/d/p

Severn barrage: 550 km^2^

8 GW (2 GW average)

£15bn

£250

0.8 kWh/d/p

Tidal lagoons: 800 km^2^

1.75 GW average

£2.6bn?

£45

0.7 kWh/d/p

Tidal stream:    15 000 turbines – 2000 km^2^

18 GW (5.5 GW average)

£21bn?

£350

2.2 kWh/d/p

Nuclear power: 40 stations

45 GW

£60bn

£1000

16 kWh/d/p

– based on Olkiluoto, Finland

Clean coal

8 GW

£16bn

£270

3 kWh/d/p

Concentrating solar power    in deserts: 2700 km^2^

40 GW average

£340bn

£5700

16 kWh/d/p

– based on Solúcar

Land in Europe for 1600 km of    HVDC power lines: 1200 km^2^

50 GW

£1bn

£15

– assuming land costs £7500 per ha

2000 km of HVDC power lines

50 GW

£1bn

£15

– based on German Aerospace Center estimates

Biofuels: 30 000 km^2^

(cost not estimated)

2 kWh/d/p

Wood/Miscanthus: 31 000 km^2^

(cost not estimated)

5 kWh/d/p

Table 28.3. Areas of land and sea required by plan M, and rough costs.
Costs with a question mark are for technologies where no accurate cost
is yet available from prototypes. “1 GW(th)” denotes one GW of thermal
power.

thus have a cost in the ballpark of £300 billion. The rough costs in
table 28.3 add up to £870 bn, with the solar power facilities dominating
the total – the photovoltaics cost £190 bn and the concentrating solar
stations cost £340 bn. Both these costs might well come down
dramatically as we learn by doing. A government report leaked by the
Guardian in August 2007 estimates that achieving “20% by 2020” (that is,
20% of all energy from renewables, which would require an increase in
renewable power of 80 GW) could cost “up to £22 billion” (which would
average out to £1.7 billion per year). Even though this estimate is
smaller than the £80 billion that the rule of thumb I just mentioned
would have suggested, the authors of the leaked report seem to view £22
billion as an “unreasonable” cost, preferring a target of just 9%
renewables. (Another reason they give for disliking the “20% by 2020”
target is that the resulting greenhouse gas savings “risk making the EU
emissions trading scheme redundant.” Terrifying thought!)

Other things that cost a billion
--------------------------------

Billions are big numbers and hard to get a feel for. To try to help put
the cost of kicking fossil fuels into perspective, let’s now list some
other things that also come in billions of pounds, or in billions per
year. I’ll also express many of these expenditures “per person,”
dividing the total by an appropriate population.

Perhaps the most relevant quantity to compare with is the money we
*already* spend on energy every year. In the UK, the money spent on
energy by final users is £75 billion per year, and the total market
value of all energy consumed is £130 billion per year. So the idea of
spending £1.7 billion per year on investment in future energy
infrastructure seems not at all unreasonable – it is less than 3% of our
current expenditure on energy!

Another good comparison to make is with our annual expenditure on
insurance: some of the investments we need to make offer an uncertain
return – just like insurance. UK individuals and businesses spend £90 bn
per year on insurance.

### Subsidies

£56 billion over 25 years: the cost of decommissioning the UK’s nuclear
power stations[^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#217).
That’s the 2004 figure; in 2008 it was up to £73 billion (£1200 per
person in the UK). [6eoyhg]

### Transport

£4.3 billion: the cost of London Heathrow Airport’s Terminal 5. (£72 per
person in the UK.) £1.9 billion: the cost of widening 91 km of the M1
(from junction 21 to 30, figure 28.4). [yu8em5]. (£32 per person in the
UK.)

![](figure239.png)

Figure 28.4. The M1, from junction 21 to 30.

### Special occasions

Cost of the London 2012 Olympics: £2.4 billion; no, I’m sorry, £5
billion [3x2cr4]; or perhaps £9 billion [2dd4mz]. (£150 per person in
the UK.)

### Business as usual

£2.5 billion/y: Tesco’s profits (announced 2007). (£42 per year per
person in the UK.) £10.2 billion/y: spent by British people on food that
they buy but do not eat. (£170 per year per person in the UK.) £11
billion/y: BP’s profits (2006). £13 billion/y: Royal Dutch Shell’s
profits (2006). \$40 billion/y. Exxon’s profits (2006). \$33 billion/y.
World expenditure on perfumes and make-up. \$700 billion per year: USA’s
expenditure on foreign oil (2008). (\$2300 per year per person in the
USA.)

### Government business as usual

£1.5 billion: the cost of refurbishment of Ministry of Defence offices.
(Private Eye No. 1176, 19th January 2007, page 5.) (£25 per person in
the UK.) £15 billion: the cost of introducing UK identity card scheme
[7vlxp]. (£250 per person in the UK.)

### Planning for the future

£3.2 billion: the cost of the Langeled pipeline, which ships gas from
Norwegian producers to Britain. The pipeline’s capacity is 20 billion
m^3^ per year, corresponding to a power of 25 GW. [6x4nvu] [39g2wz]
[3ac8sj]. (£53 per person in the UK.)

### Tobacco taxes and related games

£8 billion/y: annual revenue from tobacco taxes in the UK [y7kg26].
(£130 per year per person in the UK.) The European Union spends almost
e1 billion a year subsidising tobacco farming. www.ash.org.uk \$46
billion/y: Annual cost of the USA’s “War on drugs.” [r9fcf] (\$150 per
year per person in the USA.)

### Space

\$1.7 billion: the cost of one space shuttle. (\$6 per person in the
USA.)

![](figure347.png)

![](figure238.png)

### Banks

\$700 billion: in October 2008, the US government committed \$700
billion to bailing out Wall Street, and ... £500 billion: the UK
government committed £500 billion to bailing out British banks.

### Military

£5 billion per year: UK’s arms exports (£83 per year per person in the
UK), of which £2.5 billion go to the Middle East, and £1 billion go to
Saudi Arabia. Source: Observer, 3 December 2006. £8.5 billion: cost of
redevelopment of army barracks in Aldershot and Salis- bury Plain. (£140
per person in the UK.) £3.8 billion: the cost of two new aircraft
carriers (£63 per person in the UK).
news.bbc.co.uk/1/low/scotland/6914788.stm \$4.5 billion per year: the
cost of not making nuclear weapons – the US Department of Energy’s
budget allocates at least \$4.5 billion per year to “stockpile
stewardship” activities to maintain the nuclear stockpile *without*
nuclear testing and *without* large-scale production of new weapons.
(\$15 per year per person in America.)

Figure 28.6. A few more things that run into billions. The vertical
scale is squished 20-fold compared with the previous figure, figure
28.5, which is shown to scale inside the magenta box.

£10–25 billion: the cost of replacing Trident, the British nuclear
weapon system. (£170–420 per person in the UK.) [ysncks]. \$63 billion:
American donation of “military aid” (i.e. weapons) to the Middle East
over 10 years – roughly half to Israel, and half to Arab states.
[2vq59t] (\$210 per person in the USA.) \$1200 billion per year: world
expenditure on arms [ym46a9]. (\$200 per year per person in the world.)
\$2000 billion or more: the cost, to the USA, of the [99bpt] Iraq war
according to Nobel prize-winning economist Joseph Stiglitz. (\$7000 per
person in America.)

According to the Stern review, the global cost of averting dangerous
climate change (if we act now) is \$440 billion per year (\$440 per year
per person, if shared equally between the 1 billion richest people). In
2005, the US government alone spent \$480 billion on wars and
preparation for wars. The total military expenditure of the 15 biggest
military-spending countries was \$840 billion.

### Expenditure that does **not** run into billions

£0.012 billion per year: the smallest item displayed in figure 28.5 is
the UK government’s annual investment in renewable-energy research and
development. (£0.20 per person in the UK, per year.)

Notes and further reading
-------------------------

215*Figure 28.2.* I’ve assumed that the solar photovoltaic farms have a
power per unit area of 5 W/m^2^, the same as the Bavaria farm on p41, so
each farm on the map delivers 100 MW on average. Their total average
production would be 5 GW, which requires roughly 50 GW of peak capacity
(that’s 16 times Germany’s PV capacity in 2006). The yellow hexagons
representing concentrating solar power have an average power of 5 GW
each; it takes two of these hexagons to power one of the “blobs” of
Chapter 25.

217*A government report leaked by the Guardian...* The Guardian report,
13th August 2007, said [2bmuod] “Government officials have secretly
briefed ministers that Britain has no hope of getting remotely near the
new European Union renewable energy target that Tony Blair signed up to
in the spring - and have suggested that they find ways of wriggling out
of it.” The leaked document is at [3g8nn8].

219*... perfume...* Source: Worldwatch Institute
www.worldwatch.org/press/news/2004/01/07/

221*...wars and preparation for wars...* www.conscienceonline.org.uk

–*Government investment in renewable-energy-related research and
development.* In 2002–3, the UK Government’s commitment to
renewable-energy-related R&D was £12.2 million. Source: House of Lords
Science and Technology Committee, 4th Report of Session 2003–04.
[3jo7q2] Comparably small is the government’s allocation to the Low
Carbon Buildings Programme, £0.018bn/y shared between wind, biomass,
solar hot water/PV, ground-source heat pumps, micro-hydro and micro CHP.

29   What to do now {.darkblue}
===================

> Unless we act now, not some time distant but now, these consequences,
> disastrous as they are, will be irreversible. So there is nothing more
> serious, more urgent or more demanding of leadership.
>
> Tony Blair, 30 October 2006

> a bit impractical actually...
>
> Tony Blair, two months later, responding to the suggestion that he
> should *show* leadership by not flying to Barbados for holidays.

What we should do depends in part on our motivation. Recall that on page
5 we discussed three motivations for getting off fossil fuels: the end
of cheap fossil fuels; security of supply; and climate change. Let’s
assume first that we have the climate-change motivation – that we want
to reduce carbon emissions radically. (Anyone who doesn’t believe in
climate change can skip this section and rejoin the rest of us on page
223.)

What to do about carbon pollution
---------------------------------

We are not on track to a zero-carbon future. Long-term investment is not
happening. Carbon sequestration companies are not thriving, even though
the advice from climate experts and economic experts alike is that
sucking carbon dioxide from thin air will very probably be necessary to
avoid dangerous climate change. Carbon is not even being captured at any
coal power stations (except for one tiny prototype in Germany).

Why not?

The principal problem is that carbon pollution is not priced correctly.
And there is no confidence that it’s going to be priced correctly in the
future. When I say “correctly,” I mean that the price of emitting carbon
dioxide should be big enough such that every running coal power station
has carbon capture technology fitted to it.

Solving climate change is a complex topic, but in a single crude brush-
stroke, here is the solution: the price of carbon dioxide must be such
that people *stop burning coal without capture*. Most of the solution is
captured in this one brush-stroke because, in the long term, coal is the
big fossil fuel. (Trying to reduce emissions from oil and gas is of
secondary importance because supplies of both oil and gas are expected
to decline over the next 50 years.)

So what do politicians need to do? They need to ensure that all coal
power stations have carbon capture fitted. The first step towards this
goal is for government to finance a large-scale demonstration project to
sort out the technology for carbon capture and storage; second,
politicians need to

enough to promote investment in alternatives to fossil fuels, and
invest- ment in efficiency measures. Notice this is exactly the same
policy as was suggested in the previous section. So, whether our
motivation is fixing climate change, or ensuring security of supply, the
policy outcome is the same: we need a carbon price that is stable and
high. Figure 29.2 indicates very roughly the various carbon prices that
are required to bring about various behaviour changes and investments;
and the much lower prices charged by organizations that claim to
“offset” greenhouse-gas emissions. How best to arrange a high carbon
price? Is the European emissions trading scheme (figure 29.1) the way to
go? This question lies in the domain of economists and international
policy experts. The view of Cambridge economists Michael Grubb and David
Newbery is that the European emis- sions trading scheme is not up to the
job – “current instruments will not deliver an adequate investment
response.”

*The Economist* recommends a carbon tax as the primary mechanism for
government support of clean energy sources. The Conservative Party’s
Quality of Life Policy Group also recommends increasing environmental
taxes and reducing other taxes – “a shift from *pay as you earn to pay
as you burn*.” The Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution also says
that the UK should introduce a carbon tax. “It should apply upstream and
cover all sectors.”

So, there’s clear support for a big carbon tax, accompanied by
reductions in employment taxes, corporation taxes, and value-added
taxes. But taxes and markets alone are not going to bring about all the
actions needed. The tax-and-market approach fails if consumers sometimes
choose irrat- ionally, if consumers value short-term cash more highly
than long-term savings, or if the person choosing what to buy doesn’t
pay all the costs associated with their choice.

Indeed many brands are “*reassuringly expensive*.” Consumer choice is
not determined solely by price signals. Many consumers care more about
image and perception, and some deliberately buy expensive.

Once an inefficient thing is bought, it’s too late. It’s essential that
inefficient things should not be manufactured in the first place; or
that the consumer, when buying, should feel influenced not to buy
inefficient things.

Here are some further examples of failures of the free market.

### The admission barrier

Imagine that carbon taxes are sufficiently high that a new super-duper
low- carbon gizmo would cost 5% less than its long-standing high-carbon
rival, the Dino-gizmo, *if* it were mass-produced in the same
quantities. Thanks to clever technology, the Eco-gizmo’s carbon
emissions are a fantastic 90% lower than the Dino-gizmo’s. It’s clear
that it would be good for society if everyone bought Eco-gizmos now. But
at the moment, sales of the new Eco-gizmo are low, so the per-unit
economic costs are higher than the

Dino-gizmo’s. Only a few tree-huggers and lab coats will buy the Eco-
Gizmo, and Eco-Gizmo Inc. will go out of business.

Perhaps government interventions are necessary to oil the transition and
give innovation a chance. Support for research and development? Tax-
incentives favouring the new product (like the tax-incentives that oiled
the transition from leaded to unleaded petrol)?

### The problem of small cost differences

Imagine that Eco-Gizmo Inc. makes it from tadpole to frog, and that
carbon taxes are sufficiently high that an Eco-gizmo indeed costs 5%
less than its long-standing high-carbon rival from Dino-appliances, Inc.
Surely the carbon taxes will now do their job, and all consumers will
buy the low- carbon gizmo? Ha! First, many consumers don’t care too much
about a 5% price difference. Image is everything. Second, if they feel
at all threatened by the Eco-gizmo, Dino-appliances, Inc. will relaunch
their Dino-gizmo, emphasizing that it’s more patriotic, announcing that
it’s now available in green, and showing cool people sticking with the
old faithful Dino-gizmo. “Real men buy Dino-gizmos.” If this doesn’t
work, Dino will issue press- releases saying scientists haven’t ruled
out the possibility that long-term use of the Eco-gizmo might cause
cancer, highlighting the case of an old lady who was tripped up by an
Eco-gizmo, or suggesting that Eco-gizmos harm the lesser spotted fruit
bat. Fear, Uncertainty, Doubt. As a backup plan, Dino-appliances could
always buy up the Eco-gizmo company. The winning product will have
nothing to do with energy saving if the economic incentive to the
consumer is only 5%.

How to fix this problem? Perhaps government should simply ban the sales
of the Dino-gizmo (just as it banned sales of leaded-petrol cars)?

### The problem of Larry and Tina

Imagine that Larry the landlord rents out a flat to Tina the tenant.
Larry is responsible for maintaining the flat and providing the
appliances in it, and Tina pays the monthly heating and electricity
bills. Here’s the problem: Larry feels no incentive to invest in
modifications to the flat that would reduce Tina’s bills. He could
install more-efficient lightbulbs, and plug in a more economical fridge;
these eco-friendly appliances would easily pay back their extra up-front
cost over their long life; but it’s Tina who would benefit, not Larry.
Similarly, Larry feels little incentive to improve the flat’s insulation
or install double-glazing, especially when he takes into account the
risk that Tina’s boyfriend Wayne might smash one of the windows when
drunk. In principle, in a perfect market, Larry and Tina would both make
the “right” decisions: Larry would install all the energy-saving
features, and would charge Tina a slightly higher monthly rent; Tina
would recognize that the modern and well-appointed flat would be cheaper
to live

in and would thus be happy to pay the higher rent; Larry would demand an
increased deposit in case of breakage of the expensive new windows; and
Tina would respond rationally and banish Wayne. However, I don’t think
that Larry and Tina can ever deliver a perfect market. Tina is poor, so
has difficulty paying large deposits. Larry strongly wishes to rent out
the flat, so Tina mistrusts his assurances about the property’s low
energy bills, suspecting Larry of exaggeration.

So some sort of intervention is required, to get Larry and Tina to do
the right thing – for example, government could legislate a huge tax on
inefficient appliances; ban from sale all fridges that do not meet
economy benchmarks; require all flats to meet high standards of
insulation; or in- troduce a system of mandatory independent flat
assessment, so that Tina could read about the flat’s energy profile
before renting.

Investment in research and development
--------------------------------------

> We deplore the minimal amounts that the Government have committedto
> renewable-energy-related research and development (£12.2 million in
> 2002-03). ... If resources other than wind are to be exploited in the
> United Kingdom this has to change. We could not avoid the conclusion
> that the Government are not taking energy problems sufficiently
> seriously.
>
> House of Lords Science and Technology Committee

> The absence of scientific understanding often leads to superficial
> decision- making. The 2003 energy white paper was a good example of
> that. I would not like publicly to call it amateurish but it did not
> tackle the problem in a realistic way.
>
> Sir David King, former Chief Scientist

> Serving on the government’s Renewables Advisory Board ... felt like
> watching several dozen episodes of Yes Minister in slow motion. I do
> not think this government has ever been serious about renewables.
>
> Jeremy Leggett, founder of Solarcentury

I think the numbers speak for themselves. Just look at figure 28.5
(p218) and compare the billions spent on office refurbishments and
military toys with the hundred-fold smaller commitment to
renewable-energy-related research and development. It takes decades to
develop renewable tech- nologies such as tidal stream power,
concentrating solar power, and pho- tovoltaics. Nuclear fusion takes
decades too. All these technologies need up-front support if they are
going to succeed.

  Major action                                                                possible saving
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------
  Eliminate draughts.                                                         5 kWh/d
  Double glazing.                                                             10 kWh/d
  Improve wall, roof, and floor insulation.                                   10 kWh/d
  Solar hot water panels.                                                     8 kWh/d
  Photovoltaic panels.                                                        5 kWh/d
  Knock down old building and replace by new.                                 35 kWh/d
  Replace fossil-fuel heating by ground-source or    air-source heat pumps.   10 kWh/d

Finally, table 29.5 shows a few runners-up: some simple actions with
small savings.

  Action                                                                 possible saving
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------
  Wash laundry in cold water.                                            0.5 kWh/d
  Stop using a tumble-dryer; use a clothes-line    or airing cupboard.   0.5 kWh/d

Notes and further reading
-------------------------

page no.

222*“a bit impractical actually"* The full transcript of the interview
with Tony Blair (9 January 2007) is here [2ykfgw]. Here are some more
quotes from it: **Interviewer**: Have you thought of perhaps not flying
to Barbados for a holiday and not using all those air miles? **Tony
Blair**: I would, frankly, be reluctant to give up my holidays abroad.
**Interviewer**: It would send out a clear message though wouldn’t it,
if we didn’t see that great big air journey off to the sunshine? ... – a
holiday closer to home? **Tony Blair**: Yeah – but I personally think
these things are a bit impractical actually to expect people to do that.
I think that what we need to do is to look at how you make air travel
more energy efficient, how you develop the new fuels that will allow us
to burn less energy and emit less. How – for example – in the new frames
for the aircraft, they are far more energy efficient. I know everyone
always – people probably think the Prime Minister shouldn’t go on
holiday at all, but I think if what we do in this area is set people
unrealistic targets, you know if we say to people we’re going to cancel
all the cheap air travel . . . You know, I’m still waiting for the first
politician who’s actually running for office who’s going to come out and
say it – and they’re not. The other quote: “Unless we act now, not some
time distant but now, these consequences, disastrous as they are, will
be irreversible. So there is nothing more serious, more urgent or more
demanding of leadership.” is Tony Blair speaking at the launch of the
Stern review, 30 October 2006 [2nsvx2]. See also [yxq5xk] for further
comment.

225*Environmental tax reform.* See the Green Fiscal Commission,
www.greenfiscalcommission.org.uk.

226*The Economist recommends a carbon tax.* “Nuclear power’s new age,”
*The Economist*, September 8th 2007.

–*The Conservative Party’s Quality of Life Policy Group* – Gummer et al.
(2007).

Table 29.4. Seven harder actions.

Table 29.5. A few more simple actions with small savings.

30   Energy plans for Europe, America, and the World {.darkblue}
====================================================

Figure 30.1 shows the power consumptions of lots of countries or
regions, versus their gross domestic products (GDPs). It is a widely
held assumption that human development and growth are good things, so
when sketching world plans for sustainable energy I am going to assume
that all the countries with low GDP per capita are going to progress
rightwards in figure 30.1. And as their GDPs increase, it’s inevitable
that their power consumptions will increase too. It’s not clear what
consumption we should plan for, but I think that the average European
level (125 kWh per day per person) seems a reasonable assumption;
alternatively, we could assume that efficiency measures, like those
envisaged in Cartoon Britain in Chapters 19–28, allow all countries to
attain a European standard of living with a lower power consumption. In
the consumption plan on p204, Cartoon Britain’s consumption fell to
about 68 kWh/d/p. Bearing in mind that Cartoon Britain doesn’t havemuch
industrial activity, perhaps it would be sensible to assume a slightly
higher target, such as Hong Kong’s 80 kWh/d/p.

![](figure242.png)

Figure 30.1. Power consumption per capita versus GDP per capita, in
purchasing-power-parity US dollars. Data from UNDP Human Development
Report, 2007. Squares show countries having “high human development;”
circles, “medium” or “low.” Both variables are on logarithmic scales.
Figure 18.4 shows the same data on normal scales.

2.6 kWh/d per person. The Baltic and Mediterranean coastlines have no
tidal resource worth talking of.

### Solar photovoltaics and thermal panels on roofs

Most places are sunnier than the UK, so solar panels would deliver more
power in continental Europe. 10 m^2^ of roof-mounted photovoltaic panels
would deliver about 7 kWh/d in all places south of the UK. Similarly, 2
m^2^ of water-heating panels could deliver on average 3.6 kWh/d of
low-grade thermal heat. (I don’t see much point in suggesting having
more than 2 m^2^ per person of water-heating panels, since this capacity
would already be enough to saturate typical demand for hot water.)

### What else?

The total so far is 9 + 6.4 + 2 + 2.6 + 7 + 3.6 = 30.6 kWh/d per person.
The only resources not mentioned so far are geothermal power, and
large-scale solar farming (with mirrors, panels, or biomass).

Geothermal power might work, but it’s still in the research stages. I
suggest treating it like fusion power: a good investment, but not to be
relied on.

So what about solar farming? We could imagine using 5% of Europe (450
m^2^ per person) for solar photovoltaic farms like the Bavarian one in
figure 6.7 (which has a power density of 5 W/m^2^). This would deliver
an average power of

5 W/m^2^ × 450 m^2^ = 54 kWh/d per person.

Solar PV farming would, therefore, add up to something substantial. The
main problem with photovoltaic panels is their cost. Getting power
during the winter is also a concern!

Energy crops? Plants capture only 0.5 W/m^2^ (figure 6.11). Given that
Europe needs to feed itself, the non-food energy contribution from
plants in Europe can never be enormous. Yes, there will be some oil-seed
rape here and some forestry there, but I don’t imagine that the total
non-food contribution of plants could be more than 12 kWh/d per person.

### The bottom line

Let’s be realistic. Just like Britain, *Europe can’t live on its own
renewables*. So if the aim is to get off fossil fuels, Europe needs
nuclear power, or solar power in other people’s deserts (as discussed on
p179), or both.

![](figure243.png)

Figure 30.2. A solar water heater providing hot water for a family in
Michigan. The system’s pump is powered by the small photovoltaic panel
on the left.

Redoing the calculations for North America
------------------------------------------

The average American uses 250 kWh per day. Can we hit that target with
renewables? What if we imagine imposing shocking efficiency measures
(such as efficient cars and high-speed electric trains) such that
Americans were reduced to the misery of living on the mere 125 kWh/d of
an average European or Japanese citizen?

### Wind

A study by Elliott et al. (1991) assessed the wind energy potential of
the USA. The windiest spots are in North Dakota, Wyoming, and Montana.
They reckoned that, over the whole country, 435 000 km^2^ of windy land
could be exploited without raising too many hackles, and that the
electricity generated would be 4600 TWh per year, which is 42 kWh per
day per person if shared between 300 million people. Their calculations
ass- umed an average power density of 1.2 W/m^2^, incidentally – smaller
than the 2 W/m^2^ we assumed in Chapter 4. The area of these wind farms,
435 000 km^2^, is roughly the same as the area of California. The amount
of wind hardware required (assuming a load factor of 20%) would be a
capacity of about 2600 GW, which would be a 200-fold increase in wind
hardware in the USA.

### Offshore wind

If we assume that shallow offshore waters with an area equal to the sum
of Delaware and Connecticut (20 000 km^2^, a substantial chunk of all
shal- low waters on the east coast of the USA) are filled with offshore
wind farms having a power density of 3 W/m^2^, we obtain an average
power of 60 GW. That’s 4.8 kWh/d per person if shared between 300
million people. The wind hardware required would be 15 times the total
wind hardware currently in the USA.

### Geothermal

I mentioned the MIT geothermal energy study (Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, 2006) in Chapter 16. The authors are upbeat about the pot-
ential of geothermal energy in North America, especially in the western
states where there is more hotter rock. “With a reasonable investment in
R&D, enhanced geothermal systems could provide 100 GW(e) or more of
cost-competitive generating capacity in the next 50 years. Further, en-
hanced geothermal systems provide a secure source of power for the long
term.” Let’s assume they are right. 100 GW of electricity is 8 kWh/d per
person when shared between 300 million.

### Hydro

The hydroelectric facilities of Canada, the USA, and Mexico generate
about 660 TWh per year. Shared between 500 million people, that amounts
to 3.6 kWh/d per person. Could the hydroelectric output of North America
be doubled? If so, hydro would provide 7.2 kWh/d per person.

### What else?

The total so far is 42 + 4.8 + 8 + 7.2 = 62 kWh/d per person. Not enough
for even a European existence! I could discuss various other options
such as the sustainable burning of Canadian forests in power stations.
But rather than prolong the agony, let’s go immediately for a technology
that adds up: concentrating solar power.

Figure 30.3 shows the area within North America that would provide
everyone there (500 million people) with an average power of 250 kWh/d.

### The bottom line

North America’s *non-solar* renewables aren’t enough for North America
to live on. But when we include a massive expansion of solar power,
there’s enough. So North America needs solar in its own deserts, or
nuclear power, or both.

Redoing the calculations for the world
--------------------------------------

How can 6 billion people obtain the power for a European standard of
living – 80 kWh per day per person, say?

### Wind

The exceptional spots in the world with strong steady winds are the
central states of the USA (Kansas, Oklahoma); Saskatchewan, Canada; the
southern extremities of Argentina and Chile; northeast Australia;
northeast and northwest China; northwest Sudan; southwest South Africa;
Somalia; Iran; and Afghanistan. And everywhere offshore except for a
tropical strip 60 degrees wide centred on the equator.

For our global estimate, let’s go with the numbers from Greenpeace and
the European Wind Energy Association: “the total available wind re-
sources worldwide are estimated at 53 000 TWh per year.” That’s 24 kWh/d
per person.

### Hydro

Worldwide, hydroelectricity currently contributes about 1.4 kWh/d per
person.

![](figure244.png)

Figure 30.3. The little square strikes again. The 600 km by 600 km
square in North America, completely filled with concentrating solar
power, would provide enough power to give 500 million people the average
American’s consumption of 250 kWh/d.    This map also shows the square
of size 600 km by 600 km in Africa, which we met earlier. I’ve assumed a
power density of 15 W/m^2^, as before.    The area of one yellow square
is a little bigger than the area of Arizona, and 16 times the area of
New Jersey. Within each big square is a smaller 145 km by 145 km square
showing the area required in the desert – one New Jersey – to supply 30
million people with 250 kWh per day per person.

From the website www.ieahydro.org, “The International Hydropower
Association and the International Energy Agency estimate the world’s
total technical feasible hydro potential at 14 000 TWh/year [6.4 kWh/d
per person on the globe], of which about 8000 TWh/year [3.6 kWh/d per
per- son] is currently considered economically feasible for development.
Most of the potential for development is in Africa, Asia and Latin
America.”

### Tide

There are several places in the world with tidal resources on the same
scale as the Severn estuary (figure 14.8). In Argentina there are two
sites: San Jos´e and Golfo Nuevo; Australia has the Walcott Inlet; the
USA & Canada share the Bay of Fundy; Canada has Cobequid; India has the
Gulf of Khambat; the USA has Turnagain Arm and Knik Arm; and Russia has
Tugur.

And then there is the world’s tidal whopper, a place called Penzhinsk in
Russia with a resource of 22 GW – ten times as big as the Severn!

Kowalik (2004) estimates that worldwide, 40–80 GW of tidal power could
be generated. Shared between 6 billion people, that comes to 0.16– 0.32
kWh/d per person.

### Wave

We can estimate the total extractable power from waves by multiplying
the length of exposed coastlines (roughly 300 000 km) by the typical
power per unit length of coastline (10 kW per metre): the raw power is
thus about 3000 GW.

Assuming 10% of this raw power is intercepted by systems that are
50%-efficient at converting power to electricity, wave power could
deliver 0.5 kWh/d per person.

### Geothermal

According to D. H. Freeston of the Auckland Geothermal Institute, geo-
thermal power amounted on average to about 4 GW, worldwide, in 1995 –
which is 0.01 kWh/d per person.

If we assume that the MIT authors on p234 were right, and if we assume
that the whole world is like America, then geothermal power offers 8
kWh/d per person.

### Solar for energy crops

People get all excited about energy crops like jatropha, which, it’s
claimed, wouldn’t need to compete with food for land, because it can be
grown on wastelands. People need to look at the numbers before they get
excited.

The numbers for jatropha are on p284. Even if *all* of Africa were
completely covered with jatropha plantations, the power produced, shared
between six billion people, would be 8 kWh/d per person (which is only
one third of today’s global oil consumption). You can’t fix your oil
addiction by switching to jatropha!

Let’s estimate a bound on the power that energy crops could deliver for
the whole world, using the same method we applied to Britain in Chapter
6: imagine taking all arable land and devoting it to energy crops. 18%
of the world’s land is currently arable or crop land – an area of 27
million km2. That’s 4500 m^2^ per person, if shared between 6 billion.
Assuming a power density of 0.5 W/m^2^, and losses of 33% in processing
and farming, we find that energy crops, fully taking over all
agricultural land, would deliver 36 kWh/d per person. Now, maybe this is
an underestimate since in figure 6.11 (p43) we saw that Brazilian
sugarcane can deliver a power density of 1.6 W/m^2^, three times bigger
than I just assumed. OK, maybe energy crops from Brazil have some sort
of future. But I’d like to move on to the last option.

### Solar heaters, solar photovoltaics, and concentrating solar power

Solar thermal water heaters are a no-brainer. They will work almost
every- where in the world. China are world leaders in this technology.
There’s over 100 GW of solar water heating capacity worldwide, and more
than half of it is in China.

Solar photovoltaics were technically feasible for Europe, but I judged
them too expensive. I hope I’m wrong, obviously. It will be wonderful if
the cost of photovoltaic power drops in the same way that the cost of
computer power has dropped over the last forty years.

My guess is that in many regions, the best solar technology for
electric- ity production will be the concentrating solar power that we
discussed on pages 178 and 236. On those pages we already established
that one billion people in Europe and North Africa could be sustained by
country-sized solar power facilities in deserts near the Mediterranean;
and that half a billion in North America could be sustained by
Arizona-sized facilities in the deserts of the USA and Mexico. I’ll
leave it as an exercise for the reader to identify appropriate deserts
to help out the other 4.5 billion people in the world.

### The bottom line

The non-solar numbers add up as follows. Wind: 24 kWh/d/p; hydro: 3.6
kWh/d/p; tide: 0.3 kWh/d/p; wave: 0.5 kWh/d/p; geothermal: 8 kWh/d/p – a
total of 36 kWh/d/p. Our target was a post-European consumption of 80
kWh/d per person. We have a clear conclusion: the non-solar renewables
may be “huge,” but they are not huge enough. To

  ------------------- -----
  Sheffield           28%
  Edinburgh           30%
  Manchester          31%
  Cork                32%
  London              34%
  Cologne             35%
  Copenhagen          38%
  Munich              38%
  Paris               39%
  Berlin              42%
  Wellington, NZ      43%
  Seattle             46%
  Toronto             46%
  Detroit, MI         54%
  Winnipeg            55%
  Beijing 2403        55%
  Sydney 2446         56%
  Pula, Croatia       57%
  Nice, France        58%
  Boston, MA          58%
  Bangkok, Thailand   60%
  Chicago             60%
  New York            61%
  Lisbon, Portugal    61%
  Kingston, Jamaica   62%
  San Antonio         62%
  Seville, Spain      66%
  Nairobi, Kenya      68%
  Johannesburg, SA    71%
  Tel Aviv            74%
  Los Angeles         77%
  Upington, SA        91%
  Yuma, AZ            93%
  Sahara Desert       98%
  ------------------- -----

Table 30.4. World sunniness figures. [3doaeg]

complete a plan that adds up, we must rely on one or more forms of solar
power. Or use nuclear power. Or both.

Notes and further reading
-------------------------

page no.

234*North American offshore wind resources.*
www.ocean.udel.edu/windpower/ResourceMap/index-wn-dp.html

235*North America needs solar in its own deserts, or nuclear power, or
both.* To read Google’s 2008 plan for a 40% defossilization of the USA,
see Jeffery Greenblatt’s article *Clean Energy* 2030 [3lcw9c]. The main
features of this plan are efficiency measures, electrification of
transport, and electricity production from renewables. Their electricity
production plan includes

  ----------------- -------------------------------
  10.6 kWh/d/p      of wind power,
  2.7 kWh/d/p       of solar photovoltaic,
  1.9 kWh/d/p       of concentrating solar power,
  1.7 kWh/d/p       of biomass,
  and 5.8 kWh/d/p   of geothermal power
  ----------------- -------------------------------

by 2030. That’s a total of 23 kWh/d/p of new renewables. They also
assume a small increase in nuclear power from 7.2 kWh/d/p to 8.3
kWh/d/p, and no change in hydroelectricity. Natural gas would continue
to be used, contributing 4 kWh/d/p.

237*The world’s total hydro potential...* Source:
www.ieahydro.org/faq.htm.

–*Global coastal wave power resource is estimated to be 3000 GW.* See
Quayle and Changery (1981).

–*Geothermal power in 1995.* Freeston (1996).

238*Energy crops.* See Rogner (2000) for estimates similar to mine.

Further reading: *Nature* magazine has an 8-page article discussing how
to power the world (Schiermeier et al., 2008).

31   The last thing we should talk about {.darkblue}
========================================

*Capturing carbon dioxide from thin air is the last thing we should talk
about.*

When I say this, I am deliberately expressing a double meaning. First,
the energy requirements for carbon capture from thin air are so
enormous, it seems almost absurd to talk about it (and there’s the worry
that raising the possibility of fixing climate change by this sort of
geoengineering might promote inaction today). But second, I do think we
should talk about it, contemplate how best to do it, and fund research
into how to do it better, because capturing carbon from thin air may
turn out to be our last line of defense, if climate change is as bad as
the climate scientists say, and if humanity fails to take the cheaper
and more sensible options that may still be available today.

Before we discuss capturing carbon from thin air, we need to understand
the global carbon picture better.

Understanding CO~2~
-------------------

When I first planned this book, my intention was to ignore climate
change altogether. In some circles, “Is climate change happening?” was a
contro- versial question. As were “Is it caused by humans?” and “Does it
matter?” And, dangling at the end of a chain of controversies, “What
should we do about it?” I felt that sustainable energy was a compelling
issue by itself, and it was best to avoid controversy. My argument was
to be: “Never mind when fossil fuels are going to run out; never mind
whether climate change is happening; *burning fossil fuels is not
sustainable anyway*; let’s imagine liv- ing sustainably, and figure out
how much sustainable energy is available.”

However, climate change has risen into public consciousness, and it
raises all sorts of interesting back-of-envelope questions. So I decided
to discuss it a little in the preface and in this closing chapter. Not a
complete discussion, just a few interesting numbers.

### Units

Carbon pollution charges are usually measured in dollars or euros per
ton of CO~2~ so I’ll use the *ton* of CO~2~ as the main unit when
talking about per- capita carbon pollution, and the *ton of CO~2~ per
year* to measure rates of pollution. (The average European’s greenhouse
emissions are equivalent to 11 tons per year of CO~2~; or 30 kg per day
of CO~2~.) But when talking about carbon in fossil fuels, vegetation,
soil, and water, I’ll talk about tons of carbon. One ton of CO~2~
contains 12/44 tons of carbon, a bit more than a quarter of a ton. On a
planetary scale, I’ll talk about gigatons of carbon (Gt C). A gigaton of
carbon is a billion tons. Gigatons are hard to imagine, but if you want
to bring it down to a human scale, imagine burning one

![](figure434.png)

![](figure245.png)

Figure 31.1. The weights of an atom of carbon and a molecule of CO~2~
are in the ratio 12 to 44, because the carbon atom weighs 12 units and
the two oxygen atoms weigh 16 each. 12 + 16 +16 = 44.

animal life, and decaying materials). Soils and vegetation together
contain about 3700 Gt. Accessible fossil fuels – mainly coal – contain
about 1600 Gt. Finally, the atmosphere contains about 600 Gt of carbon.

Until recently, all these pools of carbon were roughly in balance: all
flows of carbon out of a pool (say, soils, vegetation, or atmosphere)
were balanced by equal flows into that pool. The flows into and out of
the fossil fuel pool were both negligible. Then humans started burning
fossil fuels. This added two extra *unbalanced* flows, as shown in
figure 31.3.

The rate of fossil fuel burning was roughly 1 Gt C/y in 1920, 2 Gt C/y
in 1955, and 8.4 Gt C in 2006. (These figures include a small
contribution from cement production, which releases CO~2~ from
limestone.)

How has this significant extra flow of carbon modified the picture shown
in figure 31.2? Well, it’s not exactly known. Figure 31.3 shows the key
things that *are* known. Much of the extra 8.4 Gt C per year that we’re
putting into the atmosphere stays in the atmosphere, raising the at-
mospheric concentration of carbon-dioxide. The atmosphere equilibrates
fairly rapidly with the surface waters of the oceans (this equilibration
takes only five or ten years), and there is a net flow of CO~2~ from the
atmosphere into the surface waters of the oceans, amounting to 2 Gt C
per year. (Recent research indicates this rate of carbon-uptake by the
oceans may be reducing, however.) This unbalanced flow into the surface
waters causes ocean acidification, which is bad news for coral. Some
extra carbon is moving into vegetation and soil too, perhaps about 1.5
Gt C per year, but these flows are less well measured. Because roughly
half of the carbon emissions are staying in the atmosphere, continued
carbon pollution at a rate of 8.4 Gt C per year will continue to
increase CO~2~ levels in the atmosphere, and in the surface waters.

What is the long-term destination of the extra CO~2~? Well, since the
amount in fossil fuels is so much smaller than the total in the oceans,
“in the long term” the extra carbon will make its way into the ocean,
and the amounts of carbon in the atmosphere, vegetation, and soil will
return to normal. However, “the long term” means thousands of years.
Equilibration between atmosphere and the *surface* waters is rapid, as I
said, but figures 31.2 and 31.3 show a dashed line separating the
surface waters of the ocean from the rest of the ocean. On a time-scale
of 50 years, this boundary is virtually a solid wall. Radioactive carbon
dispersed across the globe by the atomic bomb tests of the 1960s and 70s
has penetrated the oceans to a depth of only about 400 m. In contrast
the average depth of the oceans is about 4000 m.

The oceans circulate slowly: a chunk of deep-ocean water takes about
1000 years to roll up to the surface and down again. The circulation of
the deep waters is driven by a combination of temperature gradients and
salinity gradients, so it’s called the thermohaline circulation (in
contrast to the circulations of the surface waters, which are
wind-driven).

This slow turn-over of the oceans has a crucial consequence: we have

![](figure247.png)

Figure 31.3. The arrows show two extra carbon flows produced by burning
fossil fuels. There is an imbalance between the 8.4 Gt C/y emissions
into the atmosphere from burning fossil fuels and the 2 Gt C/y take-up
of CO~2~ by the oceans. This cartoon omits the less-well quantified
flows between atmosphere, soil, vegetation, and so forth.

enough fossil fuels to seriously influence the climate over the next
1000 years.

Where is the carbon going
-------------------------

Figure 31.3 is a gross simplification. For example, humans are causing
ad- ditional flows not shown on this diagram: the burning of peat and
forests in Borneo in 1997 alone released about 0.7 Gt C.
Accidentally-started fires in coal seams release about 0.25 Gt C per
year.

Nevertheless, this cartoon helps us understand roughly what will hap-
pen in the short term and the medium term under various policies. First,
if carbon pollution follows a “business as usual” trajectory, burning
another 500 Gt of carbon over the next 50 years, we can expect the
carbon to con- tinue to trickle gradually into the surface waters of the
ocean at a rate of 2 Gt C per year. By 2055, at least 100 Gt of the 500
would have gone into the surface waters, and CO~2~ concentrations in the
atmosphere would be roughly double their pre-industrial levels.

If fossil-fuel burning were reduced to zero in the 2050s, the 2 Gt flow
from atmosphere to ocean would also reduce significantly. (I used to
imag- ine that this flow into the ocean would persist for decades, but
that would be true only if the surface waters were out of equilibrium
with the atmo- sphere; but, as I mentioned earlier, the surface waters
and the atmosphere reach equilibrium within just a few years.) Much of
the 500 Gt we put into the atmosphere would only gradually drift into
the oceans over the next few thousand years, as the surface waters roll
down and are replaced by new water from the deep.

Thus our perturbation of the carbon concentration might eventually be
righted, but only after thousands of years. And that’s assuming that
this large perturbation of the atmosphere doesn’t drastically alter the
ecosystem. It’s conceivable, for example, that the acidification of the
surface waters of the ocean might cause a sufficient extinction of ocean
plant-life that a new vicious cycle kicks in: acidification means
extinguished plant-life, means plant-life absorbs less CO~2~ from the
ocean, means oceans become even more acidic. Such vicious cycles (which
scientists call “positive feedbacks” or “runaway feedbacks”) have
happened on earth before: it’s believed, for example, that ice ages
ended relatively rapidly because of positive feedback cycles in which
rising temperatures caused surface snow and ice to melt, which reduced
the ground’s reflection of sunlight, which meant the ground absorbed
more heat, which led to increased temperatures. (Melted snow – water –
is much darker than frozen snow.) Another positive feedback possibility
to worry about involves methane hydrates, which are frozen in gigaton
quantities in places like Arctic Siberia, and in 100-gigaton quantities
on continental shelves. Global warming greater than 1 °C would possibly
melt methane hydrates, which release methane into the atmosphere, and
methane increases global warming more strongly

![](figure248.png)

Figure 31.4. Decay of a small pulse of CO~2~ added to today’s
atmosphere, according to the Bern model of the carbon cycle. Source:
Hansen et al. (2007).

than CO~2~ does.

This isn’t the place to discuss the uncertainties of climate change in
any more detail. I highly recommend the books *Avoiding Dangerous
Climate Change* (Schellnhuber et al., 2006) and *Global Climate Change*
(Dessler and Parson, 2006). Also the papers by Hansen et al. (2007) and
Charney et al. (1979).

The purpose of this chapter is to discuss the idea of fixing climate
change by sucking carbon dioxide from thin air; we discuss the energy
cost of this sucking next.

The cost of sucking
-------------------

Today, pumping carbon out of the ground is big bucks. In the future,
per- haps pumping carbon *into* the ground is going to be big bucks.
Assuming that inadequate action is taken now to halt global carbon
pollution, perhaps a coalition of the willing will in a few decades pay
to create a giant vacuum cleaner, and clean up everyone’s mess.

Before we go into details of how to capture carbon from thin air, let’s
discuss the unavoidable energy cost of carbon capture. Whatever
technolo- gies we use, they have to respect the laws of physics, and
unfortunately grabbing CO~2~ from thin air and concentrating it requires
energy. The laws of physics say that the energy required must be at
least 0.2 kWh per kg of CO~2~ (table 31.5). Given that real processes
are typically 35% efficient at best, I’d be amazed if the energy cost of
carbon capture is ever reduced below 0.55 kWh per kg.

Now, let’s assume that we wish to neutralize a typical European’s CO~2~
output of 11 tons per year, which is 30 kg per day per person. The
energy required, assuming a cost of 0.55 kWh per kg of CO~2~, is 16.5
kWh per day per person. This is exactly the same as British electricity
consumption. So powering the giant vacuum cleaner may require us to
*double* our electricity production – or at least, to somehow obtain
extra power equal to our current electricity production.

If the cost of running giant vacuum cleaners can be brought down,
brilliant, let’s make them. But no amount of research and development
can get round the laws of physics, which say that grabbing CO~2~ from
thin air and concentrating it into liquid CO~2~ requires at least 0.2
kWh per kg of CO~2~.

Now, what’s the best way to suck CO~2~ from thin air? I’ll discuss four
technologies for building the giant vacuum cleaner:

A. chemical pumps;

B. trees;

C. accelerated weathering of rocks;

D. ocean nourishment.

wood and burying it in a hole in the ground, while, next door, humanity
continues digging up fossil wood and setting fire to it? It’s daft to
imagine creating buried wood at the same time as digging up buried wood.
Even so, let’s work out the land area required to solve the climate
problem with trees.

The best plants in Europe capture carbon at a rate of roughly 10 tons of
dry wood per hectare per year – equivalent to about 15 tons of CO~2~ per
hectare per year – so to fix a European’s output of 11 tons of CO~2~ per
year we need 7500 square metres of forest per person. This required area
of 7500 square metres per person is *twice the area of Britain* per
person. And then you’d have to find somewhere to permanently store 7.5
tons of wood per person per year! At a density of 500 kg per m^3^, each
person’s wood would occupy 15 m^3^ per year. A lifetime’s wood – which,
remember, must be safely stored away and never burned – would occupy
1000 m^3^. That’s five times the entire volume of a typical house. If
anyone proposes using trees to undo climate change, they need to realise
that country-sized facilities are required. I don’t see how it could
ever work.

C. Enhanced weathering of rocks
-------------------------------

Is there a sneaky way to avoid the significant energy cost of the
chemical approach to carbon-sucking? Here is an interesting idea:
pulverize rocks that are capable of absorbing CO~2~, and leave them in
the open air. This idea can be pitched as the acceleration of a natural
geological process. Let me explain.

Two flows of carbon that I omitted from figure 31.3 are the flow of
carbon from rocks into oceans, associated with the natural weathering of
rocks, and the natural precipitation of carbon into marine sediments,
which eventually turn back into rocks. These flows are relatively small,
in- volving about 0.2 Gt C per year (0.7 Gt CO~2~ per year). So they are
dwarfed by current human carbon emissions, which are about 40 times
bigger. But the suggestion of enhanced-weathering advocates is that we
could fix climate change by speeding up the rate at which rocks are
broken down and absorb CO~2~. The appropriate rocks to break down
include olivines or mag- nesium silicate minerals, which are widespread.
The idea would be to find mines in places surrounded by many square
kilometres of land on which crushed rocks could be spread, or perhaps to
spread the crushed rocks directly on the oceans. Either way, the rocks
would absorb CO~2~ and turn into carbonates and the resulting carbonates
would end up being washed into the oceans. To pulverize the rocks into
appropriately small grains for the reaction with CO~2~ to take place
requires only 0.04 kWh per kg of sucked CO~2~. Hang on, isn’t that
smaller than the 0.20 kWh per kg required by the laws of physics? Yes,
but nothing is wrong: the rocks themselves are the sources of the
missing energy. Silicates have higher energy than carbonates, so the
rocks pay the energy cost of sucking the CO~2~ from thin

1 hectare = 10 000 m^2^

in figure 31.6 shows these areas to scale alongside the British Isles.
As usual, a plan that actually adds up requires country-sized
facilities! And we haven’t touched on how we would make all the required
urea.

While it’s an untested idea, and currently illegal, I do find ocean
nour- ishment interesting because, in contrast to geological carbon
storage, it’s a technology that might be implemented even if the
international com- munity doesn’t agree on a high value for cleaning up
carbon pollution; fishermen might nourish the oceans purely in order to
catch more fish.

> Commentators can be predicted to oppose manipulations of the ocean,
> focusing on the uncertainties rather than on the potential benefits.
> They will be playing to the public’s fear of the unknown. People are
> ready to passively accept an escalation of an established practice
> (e.g., dumping CO~2~ in the atmosphere) while being wary of
> innovations that might improve their future well being. They have an
> uneven aversion to risk.
>
> Ian Jones

> We, humanity, cannot release to the atmosphere all, or even most,
> fossil fuel CO~2~. To do so would guarantee dramatic climate change,
> yielding a different planet...
>
> J. Hansen et al (2007)

> “Avoiding dangerous climate change” is impossible – dangerous climate
> change is already here. The question is, can we avoid **catastrophic**
> climate change?
>
> David King, UK Chief Scientist, 2007

Notes
-----

page no.

240*climate change... was a controversial question.* Indeed there still
is a “yawning gap between mainstream opinion on climate change among the
educated elites of Europe and America” [voxbz].

241*Where is the carbon?* Sources: Schellnhuber et al. (2006), Davidson
and Janssens (2006).

242*The rate of fossil fuel burning...* Source: Marland et al. (2007).

–*Recent research indicates carbon-uptake by the oceans may be
reducing.* www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/news/uk/science/
article1805870.ece, www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/abstract/1136188,
[yofchc], Le Quéré et al. (2007).

–*roughly half of the carbon emissions are staying in the atmosphere.*
It takes 2.1 billion tons of carbon in the atmosphere (7.5 Gt CO~2~) to
raise the atmospheric CO~2~ concentration by one part per million (1
ppm). If all the CO~2~ we pumped into the atmosphere stayed there, the
concentration would be rising by more than 3 ppm per year – but it is
actually rising at only 1.5 ppm per year.

–*Radioactive carbon... has penetrated to a depth of only about 400 m.*
The mean value of the penetration depth of bomb ^14^C for all
observational sites during the late 1970s is 390±39 m (Broecker et al.,
1995). From [3e28ed].

![](figure250.png)

244*Global warming greater than 1 °C would possibly melt methane
hydrates.* Source: Hansen et al. (2007, p1942).

245*Table 31.5. Inescapable cost of concentrating and compressing CO~2~
from thin air.* The unavoidable energy requirement to concentrate CO~2~
from 0.03% to 100% at atmospheric pressure is *kT* ln 100/0.03 per
molecule, which is 0.13 kWh per kg. The ideal energy cost of compression
of CO~2~ to 110 bar (a pressure mentioned for geological storage) is
0.067 kWh/kg. So the total ideal cost of CO~2~ capture and compression
is 0.2 kWh/kg. According to the IPCC special report on carbon capture
and storage, the practical cost of the second step, compression of CO~2~
to 110 bar, is 0.11 kWh per kg. (0.4 GJ per t CO~2~; 18 kJ per mole
CO~2~; 7 kT per molecule.)

245*Shoving the CO~2~ down a hole in the ground or deep in the ocean.*
See Williams (2000) for discussion. “For a large fraction of injected
CO~2~ to remain in the ocean, injection must be at great depths. A
consensus is developing that the best near-term strategy would be to
discharge CO~2~ at depths of 1000–1500 metres, which can be done with
existing technology.” See also the Special Report by the IPCC:
www.ipcc.ch/ipccreports/srccs.htm.

–*In 2005, the best methods for carbon capture were quite inefficient:
the energy cost was about 3.3 kWh per kg, with a financial cost of about
\$140 per ton of CO~2~.* Sources: Keith et al. (2005), Lackner et al.
(2001), Herzog (2003), Herzog (2001), David and Herzog (2000).

–*Wallace Broecker, climate scientist. . .*
www.af-info.or.jp/eng/honor/hot/enrbro.html. His book promoting
artificial trees: Broecker and Kunzig (2008).

246*The best plants in Europe capture carbon at a rate of roughly 10
tons of dry wood per hectare per year.* Source: Select Committee on
Science and Technology.

–*Enhanced weathering of rocks.* See Schuiling and Krijgsman (2006).

247*Ocean nourishment.* See Judd et al. (2008). See also Chisholm et al.
(2001). The risks of ocean nourishment are discussed in Jones (2008).

32   Saying yes {.darkblue}
===============

Because Britain currently gets 90% of its energy from fossil fuels, it’s
no surprise that getting off fossil fuels requires big, big changes – a
total change in the transport fleet; a complete change of most building
heating systems; and a 10- or 20-fold increase in green power.

Given the general tendency of the public to say “no” to wind farms, “no”
to nuclear power, “no” to tidal barrages – “no” to anything other than
fossil fuel power systems – I am worried that we won’t actually get off
fossil fuels when we need to. Instead, we’ll settle for half-measures:
slightly-more-efficient fossil-fuel power stations, cars, and home
heating systems; a fig-leaf of a carbon trading system; a sprinkling of
wind turbines; an inadequate number of nuclear power stations.

We need to choose a plan that adds up. It *is* possible to make a plan
that adds up, but it’s not going to be easy.

We need to stop saying no and start saying yes. We need to stop the
Punch and Judy show and get building.

If you would like an honest, realistic energy policy that adds up,
please tell all your political representatives and prospective political
candidates.

A   Cars II {.red}
===========

We estimated that a car driven 100 km uses about 80 kWh of energy.

Where does this energy go? How does it depend on properties of the car?
Could we make cars that are 100 times more efficient? Let’s make a
simple cartoon of car-driving, to describe where the energy goes. The
energy in a typical fossil-fuel car goes to four main destinations, all
of which we will explore:

1.  speeding up then slowing down using the brakes;
2.  air resistance;
3.  rolling resistance;
4.  heat – 75% of the energy is thrown away as heat, because the energy-
    conversion chain is inefficient.

Initially our cartoon will ignore rolling resistance; we’ll add in this
effect later in the chapter.

Assume the driver accelerates rapidly up to a cruising speed *v*, and
maintains that speed for a distance *d*, which is the distance between
traffic lights, stop signs, or congestion events. At this point, he
slams on the brakes and turns all his kinetic energy into heat in the
brakes. (This vehicle doesn’t have fancy regenerative braking.) Once
he’s able to move again, he accelerates back up to his cruising speed,
*v*. This acceleration gives the car kinetic energy; braking throws that
kinetic energy away.

Energy goes not only into the brakes: while the car is moving, it makes
air swirl around. A car leaves behind it a tube of swirling air, moving
at a speed similar to *v*. Which of these two forms of energy is the
bigger: kinetic energy of the swirling air, or heat in the brakes? Let’s
work it out.

-   The car speeds up and slows down once in each duration *d/v*. The
    rate at which energy pours into the brakes is:

kinetic energy

 = 

^1^⁄~2~*m~c~v^2^*

 = 

^1^⁄~2~*m~c~v^3^*

,

(A.1)

time between braking events

*d/v*

*d*

where *m~c~* is the mass of the car.

![](figure251.png)

![](figure252.png)

Figure A.1.A Peugot 206 has a drag coefficient of 0.33. Photo by
Christopher Batt.

The key formula for most of the calculations in this book is:

kinetic energy = 1⁄2*mv^2^*

For example, a car of mass *m* = 1000 kg moving at 100 km per hour or
*v* = 28 m/s has an energy of

1⁄2*mv^2^* ≅  390 000 J ≅ 0.1 kWh.

![](figure253.png)

Figure A.2.Our cartoon: a car moves at speed *v* between stops separated
by a distance *d*.

Figure A.3.A car moving at speed *v* creates behind it a tube of
swirling air; the cross-sectional area of the tube is similar to the
frontal area of the car, and the speed at which air in the tube swirls
is roughly *v*.

-   The tube of air created in a time *t* has a volume *Avt*, where *A*
    is the cross-sectional area of the tube, which is similar to the
    area of the front view of the car. (For a streamlined car, *A* is
    usually a little smaller than the frontal area *A*~car~, and the
    ratio of the tube’s effective cross-sectional area to the car area
    is called the drag coefficient *c*~d~. Throughout the following
    equations, *A* means the effective area of the car, *c*~d~*A*~car~.)
    The tube has mass *m*~air~ = *ρAvt* (where *ρ* is the density of
    air) and swirls at speed *v*, so its kinetic energy is:

![](E87.png)

and the rate of generation of kinetic energy in swirling air is:

![](E88.png)

So the total rate of energy production by the car is:

power going into brakes

+

power going into swirling air

(A.2)

= ^1^⁄~2~*m~c~v^3^/d*

+

^1^⁄~2~*ρAv^3^.*

Both forms of energy dissipation scale as *v*^3^. So this cartoon
predicts that a driver who halves his speed *v* makes his power
consumption 8 times smaller. If he ends up driving the same total
distance, his journey will take twice as long, but the total energy
consumed by his journey will be four times smaller.

Which of the two forms of energy dissipation – brakes or air-swirling –
is the bigger? It depends on the ratio of

(*m*~c~/*d*)/(*ρA*) .

If this ratio is much bigger than 1, then more power is going into
brakes; if it is smaller, more power is going into swirling air.
Rearranging this ratio, it is bigger than 1 if

*m*~c~ \> *ρAd*.

Now, *Ad* is the volume of the tube of air swept out from one stop sign
to the next. And *ρAd* is the mass of that tube of air. So we have a
very simple situation: energy dissipation is dominated by
kinetic-energy-being- dumped-into-the-brakes if the mass of the car is
*bigger* than the mass of the tube of air from one stop sign to the
next; and energy dissipation is dominated by making-air-swirl if the
mass of the car is *smaller* (figure A.4).

Let’s work out the special distance *d*\* between stop signs, below
which the dissipation is braking-dominated and above which it is
air-swirling dominated (also known as drag-dominated). If the frontal
area of the car is:

*A*~car~ = 2 m wide × 1.5 m high = 3 m^2^

I’m using this formula:     mass = density × volume The symbol *ρ*
(Greek letter ‘rho’) denotes the density.

![](figure254.png)

Figure A.4. To know whether energy consumption is braking-dominated or
air-swirling-dominated, we compare the mass of the car with the mass of
the tube of air between stop-signs.

![](figure255.png)

Figure A.5. Power consumed by a car is proportional to its
cross-sectional area, during motorway driving, and to its mass, during
town driving. Guess which gets better mileage – the VW on the left, or
the spaceship?

and the drag coefficient is *c*~d~ = 1/3 and the mass is *m*~c~ = 1000
kg then the special distance is:

![](E95.png)

So “city-driving” is dominated by kinetic energy and braking if the
distance between stops is less than 750 m. Under these conditions, it’s
a good idea, if you want to save energy:

1.  to reduce the mass of your car;
2.  to get a car with regenerative brakes (which roughly halve the
    energy lost in braking – see Chapter 20); and
3.  to drive more slowly.

When the stops are significantly more than 750 m apart, energy
dissipation is drag-dominated. Under these conditions, it doesn’t much
matter what your car weighs. Energy dissipation will be much the same
whether the car contains one person or six. Energy dissipation can be
reduced:

1.  by reducing the car’s drag coefficient;
2.  by reducing its cross-sectional area; or
3.  by driving more slowly.

The actual energy consumption of the car will be the energy dissipation
in equation (A.2), cranked up by a factor related to the inefficiency of
the engine and the transmission. Typical petrol engines are about 25%
efficient, so of the chemical energy that a car guzzles, three quarters
is wasted in making the car’s engine and radiator hot, and just one
quarter goes into “useful” energy:

![](E96.png)

Let’s check this theory of cars by plugging in plausible numbers for
motorway driving. Let *v* = 70 miles per hour = 110 km/h = 31 m/s and A
= *c*~d~*A*~car~ = 1 m^2^. The power consumed by the engine is estimated
to be roughly

![](E98.png)

If you drive the car at this speed for one hour every day, then you
travel 110 km and use 80 kWh of energy per day. If you drove at half
this speed for two hours per day instead, you would travel the same
distance and use up 20 kWh of energy. This simple theory seems
consistent with the

ENERGY-PER-DISTANCE

Car at 110 km/h

↔

80 kWh/(100 km)

Bicycle at 21 km/h

↔

2.4 kWh/(100 km)

PLANES AT 900 KM/H

A380

27 kWh/100 seat-km

Table A.6. Facts worth remembering: car energy consumption.

sumption of objects with completely different speeds and areas.
Specifically, let’s assume that the area ratio is

![](E107.png)

(Four cyclists can sit shoulder to shoulder in the width of one car.)
Let’s assume the bike is not very well streamlined:

![](E108.png)

And let’s assume the speed of the bike is 21 km/h (13 miles per hour),
so

![](E109.png)

Then

![](E110.png)

So a cyclist at 21 km/h consumes about 3% of the energy per kilometre of
a lone car-driver on the motorway – about **2.4 kWh per 100 km**.

If you would like a vehicle whose fuel efficiency is 30 times better
than a car’s, it’s simple: ride a bike.

### What about rolling resistance?

Some things we’ve completely ignored so far are the energy consumed in
the tyres and bearings of the car, the energy that goes into the noise
of wheels against asphalt, the energy that goes into grinding rubber off
the tyres, and the energy that vehicles put into shaking the ground.
Collec- tively, these forms of energy consumption are called *rolling
resistance*. The standard model of rolling resistance asserts that the
force of rolling resis- tance is simply proportional to the weight of
the vehicle, independent of

  wheel                    *C*~rr~
  ------------------------ ---------
  train (steel on steel)   0.002
  bicycle tyre             0.005
  truck rubber tyres       0.007
  car rubber tyres         0.010

Table A.8. The rolling resistance is equal to the weight multiplied by
the coefficient of rolling resistance, *C*~rr~. The rolling resistance
includes the force due to wheel flex, friction losses in the wheel
bearings, shaking and vibration of both the roadbed and the vehicle
(including energy absorbed by the vehicle’s shock absorbers), and
sliding of the wheels on the road or rail. The coefficient varies with
the quality of the road, with the material the wheel is made from, and
with temperature. The numbers given here assume smooth roads. [2bhu35]

![](figure321.png) ![](figure322.png) ![](figure323.png)

Figure A.9. Simple theory of car fuel consumption (energy per distance)
when driving at steady speed. Assumptions: the car’s engine uses energy
with an efficiency of 0.25, whatever the speed; *c*~d~*A*~car~ = 1 m^2^;
*m*~car~ = 1000 kg; and *C*~rr~ = 0.01.

Figure A.10. Simple theory of bike fuel consumption (energy per
distance). Vertical axis is energy consumption in kWh per 100 km.
Assumptions: the bike’s engine (that’s you!) uses energy with an
efficiency of 0.25,; the drag-area of the cyclist is 0.75 m^2^; the
cyclist+bike’s mass is 90 kg; and *C*~rr~ = 0.005.

Figure A.11. Simple theory of train energy consumption, per passenger,
for an eight-carriage train carrying 584 passengers. Vertical axis is
energy consumption in kWh per 100 p-km. Assumptions: the train’s engine
uses energy with an efficiency of 0.90; *c*~d~*A*~train~ = 11 m^2^;
*m*~train~ = 400 000 kg; and *C*~rr~ = 0.002.

the speed. The constant of proportionality is called the coefficient of
rolling resistance, *C*~rr~. Table A.8 gives some typical values.

The coefficient of rolling resistance for a car is about 0.01. The
effect of rolling resistance is just like perpetually driving up a hill
with a slope of one in a hundred. So rolling friction is about 100
newtons per ton, independent of speed. You can confirm this by pushing a
typical one-ton car along a flat road. Once you’ve got it moving, you’ll
find you can keep it moving with one hand. (100 newtons is the weight of
100 apples.) So at a speed of 31 m/s (70 mph), the power required to
overcome rolling resistance, for a one-ton vehicle, is

force × velocity = (100 newtons) × (31 m/s) = 3100 W;

which, allowing for an engine efficiency of 25%, requires 12 kW of power
to go into the engine; whereas the power required to overcome drag was
estimated on p256 to be 80 kW. So, at high speed, about 15% of the power
is required for rolling resistance.

Figure A.9 shows the theory of fuel consumption (energy per unit
distance) as a function of steady speed, when we add together the air
resistance and rolling resistance.

The speed at which a car’s rolling resistance is equal to air resistance
is

given by

![](E114.png)

that is,

![](E115.png)[^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#260)

*Bicycles*

For a bicycle (*m* = 90 kg, *A*= 0.75 m^2^), the transition from
rolling-resist- ance-dominated cycling to air-resistance-dominated
cycling takes place at a speed of about 12 km/h. At a steady speed of 20
km/h, cycling costs about 2.2 kWh per 100 km. By adopting an aerodynamic
posture, you can reduce your drag area and cut the energy consumption
down to about 1.6 kWh per 100 km.

*Trains*

For an eight-carriage train as depicted in figure 20.4 (*m* = 400 000
kg, *A* = 11 m^2^), the speed above which air resistance is greater than
rolling resistance is

*v* = 33 m/s = 74 miles per hour.

For a single-carriage train (*m* = 50 000 kg, *A* = 11 m^2^) , the speed
above which air resistance is greater than rolling resistance is

*v* = 12 m/s = 26 miles per hour.

### Dependence of power on speed

When I say that halving your driving speed should reduce fuel
consumption (in miles per gallon) to *one quarter* of current levels,
some people feel sceptical. They have a point: most cars’ engines have
an optimum revolution rate, and the choice of gears of the car
determines a range of speeds at which the optimum engine efficiency can
be delivered. If my suggested ex- periment of halving the car’s speed
takes the car out of this designed range of speeds, the consumption
might not fall by as much as four-fold. My tacit assumption that the
engine’s efficiency is the same at all speeds and all loads led to the
conclusion that it’s always good (in terms of miles per gallon) to
travel slower; but if the engine’s efficiency drops off at low speeds,
then the most fuel-efficient speed might be at an intermediate speed
that makes a compromise between going slow and keeping the engine
efficient. For the BMW 318ti in figure A.12, for example, the optimum
speed is about 60 km/h. But if society were to decide that car speeds
should be reduced, there is nothing to stop engines and gears being
redesigned so that the peak engine efficiency was found at the right
speed. As further evidence

![](figure256.png)

Figure A.12. Current cars’ fuel consumptions do not vary as speed
squared. Prius data from B.Z. Wilson; BMW data from Phil C. Stuart. The
smooth curve shows what a speed-squared curve would look like, assuming
a drag-area of 0.6 m^2^.

![](figure257.png)

Figure A.13. Powers of cars (kW) versus their top speeds (km/h). Both
scales are logarithmic. The power increases as the third power of the
speed. To go twice as fast requires eight times as much engine power.
From Tennekes (1997).

that the power a car requires really does increase as the cube of speed,
figure A.13 shows the engine power versus the top speeds of a range of
cars. The line shows the relationship “power proportional to *v*^3^.”

### Electric cars: is range a problem?

People often say that the range of electric cars is not big enough.
Electric car advocates say “no problem, we can just put in more
batteries” – and that’s true, but we need to work out what effect the
extra batteries have on the energy consumption. The answer depends
sensitively on what energy density we assume the batteries deliver: for
an energy density of 40 Wh/kg (typical of lead-acid batteries), we’ll
see that it’s hard to push the range beyond 200 or 300 km; but for an
energy density of 120 Wh/kg (typical of various lithium-based
batteries), a range of 500 km is easily achievable.

Let’s assume that the mass of the car and occupants is 740 kg, *without*
any batteries. In due course we’ll add 100 kg, 200 kg, 500 kg, or
perhaps 1000 kg of batteries. Let’s assume a typical speed of 50 km/h
(30 mph); a drag-area of 0.8 m^2^; a rolling resistance of 0.01; a
distance between stops of 500 m; an engine efficiency of 85%; and that
during stops and starts, regenerative braking recovers half of the
kinetic energy of the car. Charging up the car from the mains is assumed
to be 85% efficient. Figure A.14 shows the transport cost of the car
versus its range, as we vary the amount of battery on board. The upper
curve shows the result for a battery whose energy density is 40 Wh/kg
(old-style lead-acid batteries). The range is limited by a wall at about
500 km. To get close to this maximum range, we have to take along
comically large batteries: for a range of 400 km, for example, 2000 kg
of batteries are required, and the transport cost is above 25 kWh per
100 km. If we are content with a range of 180 km, however, we can get by
with 500 kg of batteries. Things get much better when we switch to
lighter lithium-ion batteries. At an energy density of 120 Wh/kg,
electric cars with 500 kg of batteries can easily deliver a range of 500
km. The transport cost is predicted to be about 13 kWh per 100 km.

It thus seems to me that the range problem has been solved by the advent
of modern batteries. It would be nice to have even better batteries, but
an energy density of 120 Wh per kg is already good enough, as long as
we’re happy for the batteries in a car to weigh up to 500 kg. In
practice I imagine most people would be content to have a range of 300
km, which can be delivered by 250 kg of batteries. If these batteries
were divided into ten 25 kg chunks, separately unpluggable, then a car
user could keep just four of the ten chunks on board when he’s doing
regular commuting (100 kg gives a range of 140 km); and collect an extra
six chunks from a battery-recharging station when he wants to make
longer-range trips. During long-range trips, he would exchange his
batteries for a fresh set at a battery-exchange station every 300 km or
so.

![](figure258.png)

Figure A.14. Theory of electric car range (horizontal axis) and
transport cost (vertical axis) as a function of battery mass, for two
battery technologies. A car with 500 kg of old batteries, with an energy
density of 40 Wh per kg, has a range of 180 km. With the same weight of
modern batteries, delivering 120 Wh per kg, an electric car can have a
range of more than 500 km. Both cars would have an energy cost of about
13 kWh per 100 km. These numbers allow for a battery charging efficiency
of 85%.

Notes and further reading
-------------------------

page no.

256*Typical petrol engines are about 25% efficient.* Encarta [6by8x]
says “The efficiencies of good modern Otto-cycle engines range between
20 and 25%.” The petrol engine of a Toyota Prius, famously one of the
most efficient car engines, uses the Atkinson cycle instead of the Otto
cycle; it has a peak power output of 52 kW and has an efficiency of 34%
when delivering 10 kW [348whs]. The most efficient diesel engine in the
world is 52%-efficient, but it’s not suitable for cars as it weighs 2300
tons: the Wartsila–Sulzer RTA96-C turbocharged diesel engine (figure
A.15) is intended for container ships and has a power output of 80 MW.

–*Regenerative brakes roughly halve the energy lost in braking*. Source:
E4tech (2007).

257*Electric engines can be about 8 times lighter than petrol engines*.
A 4-stroke petrol engine has a power-to-mass ratio of roughly 0.75
kW/kg. The best electric motors have an efficiency of 90% and a
power-to-mass ratio of 6 kW/kg. So replacing a 75 kW petrol engine with
a 75 kW electric motor saves 85 kg in weight. Sadly, the power to weight
ratio of batteries is about 1 kW per kg, so what the electric vehicle
gained on the motor, it loses on the batteries.

259*The bike’s engine uses energy with an efficiency of 0.25*. This and
the other assumptions about cycling are confirmed by di Prampero et al.
(1979). The drag-area of a cyclist in racing posture is *c*~d~*A* = 0.3
m^2^. The rolling resistance of a cyclist on a high-quality racing cycle
(total weight 73 kg) is 3.2 N.

260*Figure A.12*. Prius data from B. Z. Wilson
[home.hiwaay.net/\~bzwilson/prius/]. BMW data from Phil C. Stuart
[www.randomuseless.info/318ti/economy.html].

Further reading: Gabrielli and von Kármán (1950).

![](figure259.png)

Figure A.15. The Wartsila-Sulzer RTA96-C 14-cylinder two-stroke diesel
engine. 27 m long and 13.5 m high. www.wartsila.com

B   Wind II {.green}
===========

The physics of wind power
-------------------------

To estimate the energy in wind, let’s imagine holding up a hoop with
area *A*, facing the wind whose speed is *v*. Consider the mass of air
that passes through that hoop in one second. Here’s a picture of that
mass of air just before it passes through the hoop:

![](figure501.png)

And here’s a picture of the same mass of air one second later:

![](figure502.png)

The mass of this piece of air is the product of its density *ρ*, its
area *A*, and its length, which is *v* times *t*, where *t* is one
second.

![](figure503.png)

The kinetic energy of this piece of air is

![](E122-0-0.png)

(B.1)

So the power of the wind, for an area *A* – that is, the kinetic energy
passing across that area per unit time – is

![](E123-0-0.png)

(B.2)

This formula may look familiar – we derived an identical expression on
p255 when we were discussing the power requirement of a moving car.

What’s a typical wind speed? On a windy day, a cyclist really notices
the wind direction; if the wind is behind you, you can go much faster
than

![](figure332.png)

I’m using this formula again:     mass = density × volume

miles/ hour

km/h

m/s

Beaufort scale

2.2

3.6

1

force 1

7

11

3

force 2

11

18

5

force 3

13

21

6

force 4

16

25

7

22

36

10

force 5

29

47

13

force 6

36

**58**

16

force 7

42

68

19

force 8

49

79

22

force 9

60

97

27

force 10

69

112

31

force 11

78

126

35

force 12

Figure B.1. Speeds.

![](figure260.png)

normal; the speed of such a wind is therefore comparable to the typical
speed of the cyclist, which is, let’s say, 21 km per hour (13 miles per
hour, or 6 metres per second). In Cambridge, the wind is only
occasionally this big. Nevertheless, let’s use this as a typical British
figure (and bear in mind that we may need to revise our estimates).

The density of air is about 1.3 kg per m^3^. (I usually round this to 1
kg per m^3^, which is easier to remember, although I haven’t done so
here.) Then the typical power of the wind per square metre of hoop is

![](E124-0-0.png)

(B.3)

Not all of this energy can be extracted by a windmill. The windmill
slows the air down quite a lot, but it has to leave the air with *some*
kinetic energy, otherwise that slowed-down air would get in the way.
Figure B.2 is a cartoon of the actual flow past a windmill. The maximum
fraction of the incoming energy that can be extracted by a disc-like
windmill was worked out by a German physicist called Albert Betz in
1919. If the departing wind speed is one third of the arriving wind
speed, the power extracted is 16/27 of the total power in the wind.
16/27 is 0.59. In practice let’s guess that a windmill might be 50%
efficient. In fact, real windmills are designed with particular wind
speeds in mind; if the wind speed is significantly greater than the
turbine’s ideal speed, it has to be switched off.

As an example, let’s assume a diameter of *d* = 25m, and a hub height of
32 m, which is roughly the size of the lone windmill above the city of
Wellington, New Zealand (figure B.3). The power of a single windmill is

![](E125-0-0.png)

(B.4)

(B.5)

(B.6)

Indeed, when I visited this windmill on a very breezy day, its meter
showed it was generating 60 kW.

To estimate how much power we can get from wind, we need to decide how
big our windmills are going to be, and how close together we can pack
them.

Figure B.2. Flow of air past a windmill. The air is slowed down and
splayed out by the windmill.

![](figure264.png)

Figure B.3. The Brooklyn windmill above Wellington, New Zealand, with
people providing a scale at the base. On a breezy day, this windmill was
producing 60 kW, (1400 kWh per day). Photo by Philip Banks.

How densely could such windmills be packed? Too close and the upwind
ones will cast wind-shadows on the downwind ones. Experts say that
windmills can’t be spaced closer than 5 times their diameter without
losing significant power. At this spacing, the power that windmills can
generate per unit land area is

![](E126-0-0.png)

(B.7)

(B.8)

(B.9)

(B.10)

This number is worth remembering: a wind farm with a wind speed of 6 m/s
produces a power of 2 W per m^2^ of land area. Notice that our answer
does not depend on the diameter of the windmill. The *ds* cancelled
because bigger windmills have to be spaced further apart. Bigger
windmills might be a good idea in order to catch bigger windspeeds that
exist higher up (the taller a windmill is, the bigger the wind speed it
encounters), or because of economies of scale, but those are the only
reasons for preferring big windmills.

This calculation depended sensitively on our estimate of the windspeed.
Is 6 m/s plausible as a long-term typical windspeed in windy parts of
Britain? Figures 4.1 and 4.2 showed windspeeds in Cambridge and
Cairngorm. Figure B.6 shows the mean winter and summer windspeeds in
eight more locations around Britain. I fear 6 m/s was an overestimate of
the typical speed in most of Britain! If we replace 6 m/s by Bedford’s

![](figure261.png)

![](figure265.png)

Figure B.4. Wind farm layout.

POWER PER UNIT AREA

wind farm (speed 6 m/s)

2 W/m^2^

Table B.5. Facts worth remembering: wind farms.

Figure B.6. Average summer windspeed (dark bar) and average winter
windspeed (light bar) in eight locations around Britain. Speeds were
measured at the standard weatherman’s height of 10 metres. Averages are
over the period 1971–2000.

![](figure262.png)

### Standard windmill properties

The typical windmill of today has a rotor diameter of around 54 metres
centred at a height of 80 metres; such a machine has a “capacity” of 1
MW. The “capacity” or “peak power” is the *maximum* power the windmill
can generate in optimal conditions. Usually, wind turbines are designed
to start running at wind speeds somewhere around 3 to 5 m/s and to stop
if the wind speed reaches gale speeds of 25 m/s. The actual average
power delivered is the “capacity” multiplied by a factor that describes
the fraction of the time that wind conditions are near optimal. This
factor, sometimes called the “load factor” or “capacity factor,” depends
on the site; a typical load factor for a good site in the UK is 30%. In
the Netherlands, the typical load factor is 22%; in Germany, it is 19%.

### Other people’s estimates of wind farm power per unit area

In the government’s study [www.world-nuclear.org/policy/DTI-PIU.pdf] the
UK onshore wind resource is estimated using an assumed wind farm power
per unit area of at most 9 W/m^2^ (capacity, not average production). If
the capacity factor is 33% then the average power production would be 3
W/m^2^.

The London Array is an offshore wind farm planned for the outer Thames
Estuary. With its 1 GW capacity, it is expected to become the world’s
largest offshore wind farm. The completed wind farm will consist of 271
wind turbines in 245 km^2^ [6o86ec] and will deliver an average power of
3100 GWh per year (350 MW). (Cost £1.5 bn.) That’s a power per unit area
of 350 MW/245 km^2^ = 1.4 W/m^2^. This is lower than other offshore
farms because, I guess, the site includes a big channel (Knock Deep)
that’s too deep (about 20 m) for economical planting of turbines.

> I’m more worried about what these plans [for the proposed London Array
> wind farm] will do to this landscape and our way of life than I ever
> was about a Nazi invasion on the beach.
>
> Bill Boggia of Graveney, where the undersea cables of the wind farm
> will come ashore.

Figure B.8. The qr5 from quietrevolution.co.uk. Not a typical windmill.

Queries
-------

#### What about micro-generation? If you plop one of those mini- turbines on your roof, what energy can you expect it to deliver?

Assuming a windspeed of 6 m/s, which, as I said before, is *above* the
av- erage for most parts of Britain; and assuming a diameter of 1 m, the
power delivered would be 50 W. That’s 1.3 kWh per day – not very much.
And in reality, in a typical urban location in England, a microturbine
delivers just 0.2 kWh per day – see p66.

Perhaps the worst windmills in the world are a set in Tsukuba City,
Japan, which actually consume more power than they generate. Their in-
stallers were so embarrassed by the stationary turbines that they
imported power to make them spin so that they looked like they were
working! [6bkvbn]

Notes and further reading
-------------------------

page no.

264*The maximum fraction of the incoming energy that can be extracted by
a disc-like windmill...* There is a nice explanation of this on the
Danish Wind Industry Association’s website. [yekdaa].

267*Usually, wind turbines are designed to start running at wind speeds
around 3 to 5 m/s*. [ymfbsn].

–*a typical load factor for a good site is 30%*. In 2005, the average
load factor of all major UK wind farms was 28% [ypvbvd]. The load factor
varied during the year, with a low of 17% in June and July. The load
factor for the best region in the country – Caithness, Orkney and the
Shetlands – was 33%. The load factors of the two offshore wind farms
operating in 2005 were 36% for North Hoyle (off North Wales) and 29% for
Scroby Sands (off Great Yarmouth). Average load factors in 2006 for ten
regions were: Cornwall 25%; Mid-Wales 27%; Cambridgeshire and Norfolk
25%; Cumbria 25%; Durham 16%; Southern Scotland 28%; Orkney and
Shetlands 35%; Northeast Scotland 26%; Northern Ireland 31%; offshore
29%. [wbd8o]

Watson et al. (2002) say a minimum annual mean wind speed of 7.0 m/s is
currently thought to be necessary for commercial viability of wind
power. About 33% of UK land area has such speeds.

![](figure268.png)

Figure B.9. An Ampair “600 W” micro-turbine. The average power generated
by this micro-turbine in Leamington Spa is 0.037 kWh per day (1.5 W).

![](figure269.png)

Figure B.10. A 5.5-m diameter Iskra 5 kW turbine [www.iskrawind.com]
having its annual check-up. This turbine, located in Hertfordshire (not
the windiest of locations in Britain), mounted at a height of 12 m, has
an average output of 11 kWh per day. A wind farm of machines with this
performance, one per 30 m × 30 m square, would have a power per unit
area of 0.5 W/m^2^.

C   Planes II {.red}
=============

> What we need to do is to look at how you make air travel more energy
> efficient, how you develop the new fuels that will allow us to burn
> less energy and emit less.
>
> Tony Blair

> Hoping for the best is not a policy, it is a delusion.
>
> Emily Armistead, Greenpeace

What are the fundamental limits of travel by flying? Does the physics of
flight require an unavoidable use of a certain amount of energy, per
ton, per kilometre flown? What’s the maximum distance a 300-ton Boeing
747 can fly? What about a 1-kg bar-tailed godwit or a 100-gram Arctic
tern?

Just as Chapter 3, in which we estimated consumption by cars, was
followed by Chapter A, offering a model of where the energy goes in
cars, this chapter fills out Chapter 5, discussing where the energy goes
in planes. The only physics required is Newton’s laws of motion, which
I’ll describe when they’re needed.

This discussion will allow us to answer questions such as “would air
travel consume much less energy if we travelled in slower
propellor-driven planes?” There’s a lot of equations ahead: I hope you
enjoy them!

How to fly
----------

Planes (and birds) move through air, so, just like cars and trains, they
experience a drag force, and much of the energy guzzled by a plane goes
into pushing the plane along against this force. Additionally, unlike
cars and trains, planes have to expend energy *in order to stay up*.

Planes stay up by throwing air down. When the plane pushes down on air,
the air pushes up on the plane (because Newton’s third law tells it to).
As long as this upward push, which is called lift, is big enough to
balance the downward weight of the plane, the plane avoids plummeting
downwards.

When the plane throws air down, it gives that air kinetic energy. So
creating lift requires energy. The total power required by the plane is
the sum of the power required to create lift and the power required to
overcome ordinary drag. (The power required to create lift is usually
called “induced drag,” by the way. But I’ll call it the lift power,
*P*~lift~.)

The two equations we’ll need, in order to work out a theory of flight,
are Newton’s second law:

force = rate of change of momentum

(C.1)

![](figure270.png)

Figure C.1. Birds: two Arctic terns, a bar-tailed godwit, and a Boeing
747.

![](figure271.png) ![](figure272.png)

and Newton’s third law, which I just mentioned:

force exerted on A by B = − force exerted on B by A

(C.2)

If you don’t like equations, I can tell you the punchline now: we’re
going to find that the power required to create lift turns out to be
*equal* to the power required to overcome drag. So the requirement to
“stay up” *doubles* the power required.

Let’s make a cartoon of the lift force on a plane moving at speed *v*.
In a time *t* the plane moves a distance *vt* and leaves behind it a
sausage of downward-moving air (figure C.2). We’ll call the
cross-sectional area of this sausage *A*~s~. This sausage’s diameter is
roughly equal to the wingspan *w* of the plane. (Within this large
sausage is a smaller sausage of swirling turbulent air with
cross-sectional area similar to the frontal area of the plane’s body.)
Actually, the details of the air flow are much more interest- ing than
this sausage picture: each wing tip leaves behind it a vortex, with the
air between the wingtips moving down fast, and the air beyond (outside)
the wingtips moving up (figures C.3 & C.4). This upward-moving air is
exploited by birds flying in formation: just behind the tip of a bird’s
wing is a sweet little updraft. Anyway, let’s get back to our sausage.

The sausage’s mass is

*m*~sausage~ = density × volume = *ρvtA*~s~

(C.3)

Let’s say the whole sausage is moving down with speed *u*, and figure
out what *u* needs to be in order for the plane to experience a lift
force equal to

Figure C.2. A plane encounters a stationary tube of air. Once the plane
has passed by, the air has been thrown downwards by the plane. The force
exerted by the plane on the air to accelerate it downwards is equal and
opposite to the upwards force exerted on the plane by the air.

Figure C.3. Our cartoon assumes that the plane leaves a sausage of air
moving down in its wake. A realistic picture involves a more complex
swirling flow. For the real thing, see figure C.4.

![](figure274.png)

Figure C.4. Air flow behind a plane. Photo by NASA Langley Research
Center.

if the plane turned its fuel’s power into drag power and lift power
perfectly efficiently. (Incidentally, another name for “energy per
distance travelled” is “force,” and we can recognize the two terms above
as the dragforce ^1^⁄~2~*c*~d~*ρA*~p~*v*^2^and the lift-related force
^1^⁄~2~(*mg*)^2^/(*ρv*^2^*A*~s~). The sum is the force, or “thrust,”
that specifies exactly how hard the engines have to push.)

Real jet engines have an efficiency of about *ε* = 1/3, so the
energy-per- distance of a plane travelling at speed *v* is

![](E147-0-0.png)

(C.14)

This energy-per-distance is fairly complicated; but it simplifies
greatly if we assume that the plane is *designed* to fly at the speed
that *minimizes* the energy-per-distance. The energy-per-distance, you
see, has got a sweet- spot as a function of *v* (figure C.5). The sum of
the two quantities ^1^⁄~2~*c*~d~*ρA*~p~*v*^2^ and
^1^⁄~2~(*mg*)^2^/(*ρv*^2^*A*~s~)is smallest when the two quantities are
equal. This phenomenon is delightfully common in physics and
engineering: two things that don’t obviously *have* to be equal *are*
actually equal, or equal within a factor of 2.

So, this equality principle tells us that the optimum speed for the
plane is such that

![](E150-0-0.png)

(C.15)

i.e.

![](E151-0-0.png)

(C.16)

This defines the optimum speed if our cartoon of flight is accurate; the
cartoon breaks down if the engine efficiency *ε* depends significantly
on speed, or if the speed of the plane exceeds the speed of sound (330
m/s); above the speed of sound, we would need a different model of drag
and lift.

Let’s check our model by seeing what it predicts is the optimum speed
for a 747 and for an albatross. We must take care to use the correct
air- density: if we want to estimate the optimum cruising speed for a
747 at 30 000 feet, we must remember that air density drops with
increasing al- titude *z* as exp(−*mgz*/*kT*), where *m* is the mass of
nitrogen or oxygen molecules, and *kT* is the thermal energy
(Boltzmann’s constant times ab- solute temperature). The density is
about 3 times smaller at that altitude.

The predicted optimal speeds (table C.6) are more accurate than we have
a right to expect! The 747’s optimal speed is predicted to be 540mph,
and the albatross’s, 32mph – both very close to the true cruising speeds
of the two birds (560mph and 30–55mph respectively).

Let’s explore a few more predictions of our cartoon. We can check
whether the force (C.13) is compatible with the known thrust of the 747.
Remembering that at the optimal speed, the two forces are equal, we just

![](figure275-2-0.png)

Figure C.5. The force required to keep a plane moving, as a function of
its speed *v*, is the sum of an ordinary drag force
^1^⁄~2~*c*~d~ρ*A*~p~*v*^2^ – which increases with speed – and the
lift-related force (also known as the induced drag)

  --- ---------------
  1   (*mg*)^2^
  2   *ρv*^2^*A*~s~
  --- ---------------

– which decreases with speed. There is an ideal speed, *v*~optimal~, at
which the force required is minimized. The force is an energy per
distance, so minimizing the force also minimizes the fuel per distance.
To optimize the fuel efficiency, fly at *v*~optimal~. This graph shows
our cartoon’s estimate of the thrust required, in kilonewtons, for a
Boeing 747 of mass 319 t, wingspan 64.4 m, drag coefficient 0.03, and
frontal area 180 m^2^, travelling in air of density *ρ* = 0.41 kg/m^3^
(the density at a height of 10 km), as a function of its speed *v* in
m/s. Our model has an optimal speed *v*~optimal~ = 220 m/s (540 mph).
For a cartoon based on sausages, this is a good match to real life!

BIRD

747

Albatross

Designer

 

Boeing

natural selection

Mass (fully-laden)

*m*

363 000 kg

8 kg

Wingspan

*w*

64.4 m

3.3 m

Area\*

*A*~p~

180 m^2^

0.09 m^2^

Density

*ρ*

0.4 kg/m^3^

1.2 kg/m^3^

Drag coefficient

*c*~d~

0.03

0.1

Optimum speed

*v*~opt~

220 m/s = 540 mph

14 m/s = 32 mph

need to pick one of them and double it:

![](E154-0-0.png)

(C.17)

(C.18)

(C.19)

(C.20)

Let’s define the filling factor *f*~A~ to be the area ratio:

![](E155-0-0.png)

(C.21)

(Think of *f*~A~ as the fraction of the square occupied by the plane in
figure C.7.) Then

force  =  (*c*~d~*f*~A~)^1/2^(*mg)*.

(C.22)

Interesting! Independent of the density of the fluid through which the
plane flies, the required thrust (for a plane travelling at the optimal
speed) is just a dimensionless constant (*c*~d~*f*~A~)^1/2^ times the
weight of the plane. This constant, by the way, is known as the
drag-to-lift ratio of the plane. (The lift-to-drag ratio has a few other
names: the glide number, glide ratio, aerodynamic efficiency, or
finesse; typical values are shown in table C.8.)

Taking the jumbo jet’s figures, *c*~d~ ≅ 0.03 and *f*~A~ ≅ 0.04, we find
the required thrust is

(*c*~d~*f*~A~)^1/2^ *mg* = 0.036 *mg* = 130 kN

(C.23)

How does this agree with the 747’s spec sheets? In fact each of the 4
engines has a maximum thrust of about 250 kN, but this maximum thrust is
used only during take-off. During cruise, the thrust is much smaller:

Table C.6. Estimating the optimal speeds for a jumbo jet and an
albatross. ∗ Frontal area estimated for 747 by taking cabin width (6.1
m) times estimated height of body (10 m) and adding double to allow for
the frontal area of engines, wings, and tail; for albatross, frontal
area of 1 square foot estimated from a photograph.

![](figure276.png)

Figure C.7. Frontal view of a Boeing 747, used to estimate the frontal
area *A*~p~ of the plane. The square has area *A*~s~ (the square of the
wingspan).

  ---------------- ----
  Airbus A320      17
  Boeing 767-200   19
  Boeing 747-100   18
  Common Tern      12
  Albatross        20
  ---------------- ----

Table C.8. Lift-to-drag ratios.

the thrust of a cruising 747 is 200 kN, just 50% more than our cartoon
suggested. Our cartoon is a little bit off because our estimate of the
drag- to-lift ratio was a little bit low.

This thrust can be used directly to deduce the transport efficiency
achieved by any plane. We can work out two sorts of transport
efficiency: the energy cost of moving *weight* around, measured in kWh
per ton-kilometre; and the energy cost of moving people, measured in kWh
per 100 passenger-kilometres.

### Efficiency in weight terms

Thrust is a force, and a force is an energy per unit distance. The total
energy used per unit distance is bigger by a factor (1/*ε*), where *ε*
is the efficiency of the engine, which we’ll take to be 1/3.

Here’s the gross transport cost, defined to be the energy per unit
weight (of the entire craft) per unit distance:

![](E162-0-0.png)

(C.24)

(C.25)

(C.26)

So the transport cost is just a dimensionless quantity (related to a
plane’s shape and its engine’s efficiency), multiplied by *g*, the
acceleration due to gravity. Notice that this gross transport cost
applies to all planes, but depends only on three simple properties of
the plane: its drag coefficient, the shape of the plane, and its engine
efficiency. It doesn’t depend on the size of the plane, nor on its
weight, nor on the density of air. If we plug in *ε* = 1/3 and assume a
lift-to-drag ratio of 20 we find the gross transport cost of *any*
plane, according to our cartoon, is

0.15 *g*

or

0.4 kWh/ton-km.

### Can planes be improved?

If engine efficiency can be boosted only a tiny bit by technological
progress, and if the shape of the plane has already been essentially
perfected, then there is little that can be done about the dimensionless
quantity. The trans- port efficiency is close to its physical limit. The
aerodynamics community say that the shape of planes could be improved a
little by a switch to blended-wing bodies, and that the drag coefficient
could be reduced a

![](figure277.png)

Figure C.9. Cessna 310N: 60 kWh per 100 passenger-km. A Cessna 310 Turbo
carries 6 passengers (including 1 pilot) at a speed of 370 km/h.
Photograph by Adrian Pingstone.

little by laminar flow control, a technology that reduces the growth of
tur- bulence over a wing by sucking a little air through small
perforations in the surface (Braslow, 1999). Adding laminar flow control
to existing planes would deliver a 15% improvement in drag coefficient,
and the change of shape to blended-wing bodies is predicted to improve
the drag coefficient by about 18% (Green, 2006). And equation (C.26)
says that the transport cost is proportional to the square root of the
drag coefficient, so improve- ments of *c*~d~ by 15% or 18% would
improve transport cost by 7.5% and 9% respectively.

This gross transport cost is the energy cost of moving weight around,
*including the weight of the plane itself*. To estimate the energy
required to move freight by plane, per unit weight of freight, we need
to divide by the fraction that is cargo. For example, if a full 747
freighter is about 1/3 cargo, then its transport cost is

0.45 *g*,

or roughly 1.2 kWh/ton-km. This is just a little bigger than the
transport cost of a truck, which is 1 kWh/ton-km.

### Transport efficiency in terms of bodies

Similarly, we can estimate a passenger transport-efficiency for a 747.

![](E168-0-0.png)

(C.27)

(C.28)

(C.29)

(C.30)

This is a bit more efficient than a typical single-occupant car (12 km
per litre). So travelling by plane is more energy-efficient than car if
there are only one or two people in the car; and cars are more efficient
if there are three or more passengers in the vehicle.

### Key points

We’ve covered quite a lot of ground! Let’s recap the key ideas. Half of
the work done by a plane goes into *staying up*; the other half goes
into *keeping going*. The fuel efficiency at the optimal speed,
expressed as an energy-per- distance-travelled, was found in the force
(C.22), and it was simply proportional to the weight of the plane; the
constant of proportionality is the drag-to-lift ratio, which is
determined by the shape of the plane.

![](figure278.png)

Figure C.10. “Fasten your cufflinks.” A Bombardier Learjet 60XR carrying
8 passengers at 780 km/h has a transport cost of 150 kWh per 100
passenger-km. Photograph by Adrian Pingstone.

So whereas lowering speed-limits for cars would reduce the energy con-
sumed per distance travelled, there is no point in considering
speed-limits for planes. Planes that are up in the air have optimal
speeds, different for each plane, depending on its weight, and they
already go at their optimal speeds. If you ordered a plane to go slower,
its energy consumption would *increase*. The only way to make a plane
consume fuel more efficiently is to put it on the ground and stop it.
Planes have been fantastically optimized, and there is no prospect of
significant improvements in plane efficiency. (See pages 37 and 132 for
further discussion of the notion that new super- jumbos are “far more
efficient” than old jumbos; and p35 for discussion of the notion that
turboprops are “far more efficient” than jets.)

### Range

Another prediction we can make is, what’s the range of a plane or bird –
the biggest distance it can go without refuelling? You might think that
bigger planes have a bigger range, but the prediction of our model is
startlingly simple. The range of the plane, the maximum distance it can
go before refuelling, is proportional to its velocity and to the total
energy of the fuel, and inversely proportional to the rate at which it
guzzles fuel:

![](E169-0-0.png)

(C.31)

Now, the total energy of fuel is the calorific value of the fuel, *C*
(in joules per kilogram), times its mass; and the mass of fuel is some
fraction *f*~fuel~ of the total mass of the plane. So

![](E170-0-0.png)

(C.32)

It’s hard to imagine a simpler prediction: the range of any bird or
plane is the product of a dimensionless factor
*εf*~fuel~/(*c*~d~*f*~A~)^1/2^ which takes into accountthe engine
efficiency, the drag coefficient, and the bird’s geometry, with a
fundamental distance,

*C*

,

*g*

which is a property of the fuel and gravity, and nothing else. No bird
size, no bird mass, no bird length, no bird width; no dependence on the
fluid density.

So what is this magic length? It’s the same distance whether the fuel is
goose fat or jet fuel: both these fuels are essentially hydrocarbons
(CH~2~)~*n*~. Jet fuel has a calorific value of *C* = 40 MJ per kg. The
distance associated with jet fuel is

![](E173-0-0.png)

(C.33)

![](figure279.png)

Figure C.11. Boeing 737-700: 30 kWh per 100 passenger-km. Photograph ©
Tom Collins.

The range of the bird is the intrinsic range of the fuel, 4000 km, times
a factor *εf*~fuel~/(*c*~d~*f*~A~)^1/2^.If our bird has engine
efficiency *ε* = 1/3 and drag-to- lift ratio (*c*~d~*f*~A~)^1/2^ ≅ 1/20,
and if nearly half of the bird is fuel (a fully-laden 747 is 46% fuel),
we find that all birds and planes, of whatever size, have the same
range: about three times the fuel’s distance – roughly 13 000 km.

This figure is again close to the true answer: the nonstop flight record
for a 747 (set on March 23–24, 1989) was a distance of 16 560 km.

And the claim that the range is independent of bird size is supported by
the observation that birds of all sizes, from great geese down to dainty
swallows and arctic tern migrate intercontinental distances. The longest
recorded non-stop flight by a bird was a distance of 11 000 km, by a
bar- tailed godwit.

How far did Steve Fossett go in the specially-designed Scaled Composites
Model 311 Virgin Atlantic GlobalFlyer? 41 467 km. [33ptcg] An unusual
plane: 83% of its take-off weight was fuel; the flight made careful use
of the jet-stream to boost its distance. Fragile, the plane had several
failures along the way.

One interesting point brought out by this cartoon: if we ask “what’s the
optimum air-density to fly in?”, we find that the *thrust* required
(C.20) at the optimum speed is independent of the density. So our
cartoon plane would be equally happy to fly at any height; there isn’t
an optimum density; the plane could achieve the same miles-per-gallon in
any density; but the optimum *speed* does depend on the density (*v*^2^
\~ 1/*ρ*, equation (C.16)). So all else being equal, our cartoon plane
would have the shortest journey time if it flew in the lowest-density
air possible. Now real engines’ efficien- cies aren’t independent of
speed and air density. As a plane gets lighter by burning fuel, our
cartoon says its optimal speed at a given density would reduce (*v*^2^
\~ *mg*/(*ρ*(*c*~d~*A*~p~*A*~s~)^1/2^)). So a plane travelling in air of
constant density should slow down a little as it gets lighter. But a
plane can both keep going at a *constant speed* and continue flying at
its *optimal* speed if it increases its altitude so as to reduce the air
density. Next time you’re on a long-distance flight, you could check
whether the pilot increases the cruising height from, say, 31 000 feet
to 39 000 feet by the end of the flight.

### How would a hydrogen plane perform?

We’ve already argued that the efficiency of flight, in terms of energy
per ton-km, is just a simple dimensionless number times *g*. Changing
the fuel isn’t going to change this fundamental argument.
Hydrogen-powered planes are worth discussing if we’re hoping to reduce
climate-changing emissions. They might also have better range. But don’t
expect them to be radically more energy-efficient.

You can think of *d*~Fuel~ as the distance that the fuel could throw
itself if it suddenly converted all its chemical energy to kinetic
energy and launched itself on a parabolic trajectory with no air
resistance. [To be precise, the distance achieved by the optimal
parabola is twice *C*/*g*.] This distance is also the *vertical* height
to which the fuel could throw itself if there were no air resistance.
Another amusing thing to notice is that the calorific value of a fuel
*C*, which I gave in joules per kilogram, is also a squared-velocity
(just as the energy-to-mass ratio *E*/*m* in Einstein’s *E* = *mc*^2^ is
a squared-velocity, *c*^2^): 40 × 10^6^ J per kg is (6000 m/s)^2^. So
one way to think about fat is “fat is 6000 metres per second.” If you
want to lose weight by going jogging, 6000 m/s (12 000 mph) is the speed
you should aim for in order to lose it all in one giant leap.

### Possible areas for improvement of plane efficiency

Formation flying in the style of geese could give a 10% improvement in
fuel efficiency (because the lift-to-drag ratio of the formation is
higher than that of a single aircraft), but this trick relies, of
course, on the geese wanting to migrate to the same destination at the
same time.

Optimizing the hop lengths: long-range planes (designed for a range of
say 15 000 km) are not quite as fuel-efficient as shorter-range planes,
because they have to carry extra fuel, which makes less space for cargo
and passengers. It would be more energy-efficient to fly shorter hops in
shorter-range planes. The sweet spot is when the hops are about 5000 km
long, so typical long-distance journeys would have one or two refuelling
stops (Green, 2006). Multi-stage long-distance flying might be about 15%
more fuel-efficient; but of course it would introduce other costs.

### Eco-friendly aeroplanes

Occasionally you may hear about people making eco-friendly aeroplanes.
Earlier in this chapter, however, our cartoon made the assertion that
the transport cost of *any* plane is about

0.4 kWh/ton-km.

According to the cartoon, the only ways in which a plane could signifi-
cantly improve on this figure are to reduce air resistance (perhaps by
some new-fangled vacuum-cleaners-in-the-wings trick) or to change the
geometry of the plane (making it look more like a glider, with immensely
wide wings compared to the fuselage, or getting rid of the fuselage
altogether).

So, let’s look at the latest news story about “eco-friendly aviation”
and see whether one of these planes can beat the 0.4 kWh per ton-km
bench- mark. If a plane uses less than 0.4 kWh per ton-km, we might
conclude that the cartoon is defective.

The Electra, a wood-and-fabric single-seater, flew for 48 minutes for 50
km around the southern Alps [6r32hf]. The Electra has a 9-m wingspan and
an 18-kW electric motor powered by 48 kg of lithium-polymer batteries.
The aircraft’s take-off weight is 265 kg (134 kg of aircraft, 47 kg of
batteries, and 84 kg of human cargo). On 23rd December, 2007 it flew a
distance of 50 km. If we assume that the battery’s energy density was
130 Wh/kg, and that the flight used 90% of a full charge (5.5 kWh), the
transport cost was roughly

0.4 kWh/ton-km,

which exactly matches our cartoon. This electrical plane is not a lower-
energy plane than a normal fossil-sucker.

Of course, this doesn’t mean that electric planes are not interesting.
If one could replace traditional planes by alternatives with equal
energy

![](figure280.png)

Figure C.12. The Electra F-WMDJ: 11 kWh per 100 p-km. Photo by
Jean–Bernard Gache. www.apame.eu

![](figure500-0-0.png)

consumption but no carbon emissions, that would certainly be a useful
technology. And, as a person-transporter, the Electra delivers a
respectable 11 kWh per 100 p-km, similar to the electric car in our
transport diagram on p128. But in this book the bottom line is always:
“where is the energy to come from?”

### Many boats are birds too

Some time after writing this cartoon of flight, I realized that it
applies to more than just the birds of the air – it applies to
hydrofoils, and to other high-speed watercraft too – all those that ride
higher in the water when moving.

Figure C.13 shows the principle of the hydrofoil. The weight of the
craft is supported by a tilted underwater wing, which may be quite tiny
compared with the craft. The wing generates lift by throwing fluid down,
just like the plane of figure C.2. If we assume that the drag is
dominated by the drag on the wing, and that the wing dimensions and
vessel speed have been optimized to minimize the energy expended per
unit distance, then the best possible transport cost, in the sense of
energy per ton-kilometre, will be just the same as in equation (C.26):

![](E181-0-0.png)

(C.34)

where *c*~d~ is the drag coefficient of the underwater wing, *f*~A~ is
the dimen- sionless area ratio defined before, *ε* is the engine
efficiency, and *g* is the acceleration due to gravity.

![](figure500-2-0-0-0.png)

Figure C.13. Hydrofoil. Photograph by Georgios Pazios.

Perhaps *c*~d~ and *f*~A~ are not quite the same as those of an
optimized aeroplane. But the remarkable thing about this theory is that
it has no dependence on the density of the fluid through which the wing
is flying. So our ballpark prediction is that the transport cost
(energy-per-distance- per-weight, including the vehicle weight) of a
hydrofoil is *the same* as the transport cost of an aeroplane! Namely,
roughly 0.4 kWh per ton-km.

For vessels that skim the water surface, such as high-speed catamarans
and water-skiers, an accurate cartoon should also include the energy
going into making waves, but I’m tempted to guess that this hydrofoil
theory is still roughly right.

I’ve not yet found data on the transport-cost of a hydrofoil, but some
data for a passenger-carrying catamaran travelling at 41 km/h seem to
agree pretty well: it consumes roughly 1 kWh per ton-km.

It’s quite a surprise to me to learn that an island hopper who goes from
island to island by plane not only gets there faster than someone who
hops by boat – he quite probably uses less energy too.

Other ways of staying up
------------------------

### Airships

This chapter has emphasized that planes can’t be made more energy-
efficient by slowing them down, because any benefit from reduced air-
resistance is more than cancelled by having to chuck air down harder.
Can this problem be solved by switching strategy: not throwing air down,
but being as light as air instead? An airship, blimp, zeppelin, or
dirigible uses an enormous helium-filled balloon, which is lighter than
air, to counteract the weight of its little cabin. The disadvantage of
this strategy is that the enormous balloon greatly increases the air
resistance of the vehicle.

The way to keep the energy cost of an airship (per weight, per distance)
low is to move slowly, to be fish-shaped, and to be very large and long.
Let’s work out a cartoon of the energy required by an idealized airship.

I’ll assume the balloon is ellipsoidal, with cross-sectional area *A*
and length *L*. The volume is *V* = ^2^⁄~3~ AL. If the airship floats
stably in air of density *ρ*, the total mass of the airship, including
its cargo and its helium, must be *m*~total~ = *ρV*. If it moves at
speed *v*, the force of air resistance is

![](E185-0-0.png)

(C.35)

where *c*~d~ is the drag coefficient, which, based on aeroplanes, we
might expect to be about 0.03. The energy expended, per unit distance,
is equal to *F* divided by the efficiency *ε* of the engines. So the
gross transport cost – the energy used per unit distance per unit mass –
is

![](E188-0-0-0-0.png)

(C.36)

![](figure281.png)

Figure C.14. The 239m-long USS Akron (ZRS-4) flying over Manhattan. It
weighed 100 t and could carry 83 t. Its engines had a total power of
3.4 MW, and it could transport 89 personnel and a stack of weapons at
93 km/h. It was also used as an aircraft carrier.

![](figure508.png)

Figure C.15. An ellipsoidal airship.

![](E188-0-0-0-1.png)

(C.37)

That’s a rather nice result! The gross transport cost of this idealized
airship depends
only[^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#281) its speed
*v* and length *L*, not on the density *ρ* of the air, nor on the
airship’s frontal area *A*.

This cartoon also applies without modification to submarines. The gross
transport cost (in kWh per ton-km) of an airship is just the same as the
gross transport cost of a submarine of identical length and speed. The
submarine will contain 1000 times more mass, since water is 1000 times
denser than air; and it will cost 1000 times more to move it along. The
only difference between the two will be the advertising revenue.

So, let’s plug in some numbers. Let’s assume we desire to travel at a
speed of 80 km/h (so that crossing the Atlantic takes three days). In SI
units, that’s 22 m/s. Let’s assume an efficiency *ε* of 1/4. To get the
best possible transport cost, what is the longest blimp we can imagine?
The Hindenburg was 245 m long. If we say *L* = 400 m, we find the
transport cost is:

![](E191.png)

If useful cargo made up half of the vessel’s mass, the net transport
cost of this monster airship would be 0.06 kWh/t-km – similar to rail.

### Ekranoplans

The ekranoplan, or water-skimming wingship, is a ground-effect aircraft:
an aircraft that flies very close to the surface of the water, obtaining
its lift not from hurling air down like a plane, nor from hurling water
down like a hydrofoil or speed boat, but by sitting on a cushion of
compressed air sand- wiched between its wings and the nearby surface.
You can demonstrate the ground effect by flicking a piece of card across
a flat table. Maintaining this air-cushion requires very little energy,
so the ground-effect aircraft, in energy terms, is a lot like a surface
vehicle with no rolling resistance. Its main energy expenditure is
associated with air resistance. Remember that for a plane at its optimal
speed, half of its energy expenditure is associated with air resistance,
and half with throwing air down.

The Soviet Union developed the ekranoplan as a military transport ve-
hicle and missile launcher in the Khrushchev era. The Lun ekranoplan
could travel at 500 km/h, and the total thrust of its eight engines was
1000 kN, though this total was not required once the vessel had risen
clear of the water. Assuming the cruising thrust was one quarter of the
maximum; that the engines were 30% efficient; and that of its 400-ton
weight, 100 tons were cargo, this vehicle had a net freight-transport
cost of 2 kWh per ton-km. I imagine that, if perfected for non-military
freight transport, the ekranoplan might have a freight-transport cost
about half that of an ordinary aeroplane.

![](figure282.png)

Figure C.16. The Lun ekranoplan – slightly longer and heavier than a
Boeing 747. Photographs: A. Belyaev.

Mythconceptions
---------------

#### The plane was going anyway, so my flying was energy-neutral.

This is false for two reasons. First, your extra weight on the plane
requires extra energy to be consumed in keeping you up. Second, airlines
respond to demand by flying more planes.

Notes and further reading
-------------------------

page no.

272*Boeing 747*. Drag coefficient for 747 from www.aerospaceweb.org.
Other 747 data from [2af5gw]. Albatross facts from [32judd].

–*Real jet engines have an efficiency of about *ε* = 1/3*. Typical
engine efficiencies are in the range 23%–36% [adg.
stanford.edu/aa241/propulsion/sfc.html]. For typical aircraft, overall
engine efficiency ranges between 20% and 40%, with the best bypass
engines delivering 30–37% when cruising
[www.grida.no/climate/ipcc/aviation/097. htm]. You can’t simply pick the
most efficient engine however, since it may be heavier (I mean, it may
have bigger mass per unit thrust), thus reducing overall plane
efficiency.

277*The longest recorded non-stop flight by a bird...* *New Scientist*
2492. “Bar-tailed godwit is king of the skies.” 26 March, 2005. 11
September, 2007: Godwit flies 11 500 km non-stop from Alaska to New
Zealand. [2qbquv]

278*Optimizing hop lengths: the sweet spot is when the hops are about
5000 km long*. Source: Green (2006).

280*Data for a passenger-carrying catamaran*. From [5h6xph]:
Displacement (full load) 26.3 tons. On a 1050 nautical mile voyage she
consumed just 4780 litres of fuel. I reckon that’s a
weight-transport-cost of 0.93 kWh per ton-km. I’m counting the total
weight of the vessel here, by the way. The same vessel’s
*passenger*-transport-efficiency is roughly 35 kWh per 100 p-km.

281*The Lun ekranoplan*. Sources: www.fas.org [4p3yco], (Taylor, 2002a).

Further reading: Tennekes (1997), Shyy et al. (1999).

D   Solar II {.green}
============

On p42 we listed four solar biomass options:

1.  “Coal substitution.”
2.  “Petroleum substitution.”
3.  Food for humans or other animals.
4.  Incineration of agricultural by-products.

We’ll estimate the maximum plausible contribution of each of these pro-
cesses in turn. In practice, many of these methods require so much
energy to be put *in* along the way that they are scarcely net
contributors (figure 6.14). But in what follows, I’ll ignore such
embodied-energy costs.

Energy crops as a coal substitute
---------------------------------

If we grow in Britain energy crops such as willow, miscanthus, or poplar
(which have an average power of 0.5 W per square metre of land), then
shove them in a 40%-efficient power station, the resulting power per
unit area is 0.2 W/m^2^. If one eighth of Britain (500 m^2^ per person)
were covered in these plantations, the resulting power would be 2.5
kWh/d per person.

Petroleum substitution
----------------------

There are several ways to turn plants into liquid fuels. I’ll express
the po- tential of each method in terms of its power per unit area (as
in figure 6.11).

### Britain’s main biodiesel crop, rape

Typically, rape is sown in September and harvested the following August.
Currently 450 000 hectares of oilseed rape are grown in the UK each
year. (That’s 2% of the UK.) Fields of rape produce 1200 litres of
biodiesel per hectare per year; biodiesel has an energy of 9.8 kWh per
litre; So that’s a power per unit area of 0.13 W/m^2^.

If we used 25% of Britain for oilseed rape, we’d obtain biodiesel with
an energy content of 3.1 kWh/d per person.

### Sugar beet to ethanol

Sugar beet, in the UK, delivers an impressive yield of 53 t per hectare
per year. And 1 t of sugar beet makes 108 litres of bioethanol.
Bioethanol has an energy density of 6 kWh per litre, so this process has
a power per unit area of 0.4 W/m^2^, not accounting for energy inputs
required.

![](figure283.png)

Figure D.1. Two trees.

![](figure284.png)

Figure D.2. Oilseed rape. If used to create biodiesel, the power per
unit area of rape is 0.13 W/m^2^. Photo by Tim Dunne.

### Bioethanol from sugar cane

Where sugar cane can be produced (e.g., Brazil) production is 80 tons
per hectare per year, which yields about 17 600 l of ethanol. Bioethanol
has an energy density of 6 kWh per litre, so this process has a power
per unit area of 1.2 W/m^2^.

### Bioethanol from corn in the USA

The power per unit area of bioethanol from corn is astonishingly low.
Just for fun, let’s report the numbers first in archaic units. 1 acre
produces 122 bushels of corn per year, which makes 122 × 2.6 US gallons
of ethanol, which at 84 000 BTU per gallon means a power per unit area
of just 0.02
W/m^2^[^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#284) – and we
haven’t taken into account any of the energy losses in processing!

### Cellulosic ethanol from switchgrass

Cellulosic ethanol – the wonderful “next generation” biofuel? Schmer et
al. (2008) found that the net energy yield of switchgrass grown over
five years on marginal cropland on 10 farms in the midcontinental US was
60 GJ per hectare per year, which is 0.2 W/m^2^. “This is a baseline
study that represents the genetic material and agronomic technology
available for switchgrass production in 2000 and 2001, when the fields
were planted. Improved genetics and agronomics may further enhance
energy sustain- ability and biofuel yield of switchgrass.”

### Jatropha also has low power per unit area

Jatropha is an oil-bearing crop that grows best in dry tropical regions
(300– 1000 mm rain per year). It likes temperatures 20–28 °C. The
projected yield in hot countries on good land is 1600 litres of
biodiesel per hectare per year. That’s a power per unit area of 0.18
W/m^2^. On wasteland, the yield is 583 litres per hectare per year.
That’s 0.065 W/m^2^.

If people decided to use 10% of Africa to generate 0.065 W/m^2^, and
shared this power between six billion people, what would we all get? 0.8
kWh/d/p. For comparison, world oil consumption is 80 million barrels per
day, which, shared between six billion people, is 23 kWh/d/p. So even if
*all* of Africa were covered with jatropha plantations, the power
produced would be only one third of world oil consumption.

### What about algae?

Algae are just plants, so everything I’ve said so far applies to algae.
Slimy underwater plants are no more efficient at photosynthesis than
their ter- restrial cousins. But there is one trick that I haven’t
discussed, which is

energy density (kWh/kg)

softwood

 

   – air dried

4.4

   – oven dried

5.5

hardwood

 

   – air dried

3.75

   – oven dried

5.0

white office paper

4.0

glossy paper

4.1

newspaper

4.9

cardboard

4.5

coal

8

straw

4.2

poultry litter

2.4

general indust’l waste

4.4

hospital waste

3.9

municipal solid waste

2.6

refuse-derived waste

5.1

tyres

8.9

Table D.3. Calorific value of wood and similar things. Sources: Yaros
(1997); Ucuncu (1993), Digest of UK Energy Statistics 2005.

![](figure504.png)

standard practice in the algae-to-biodiesel community: they grow their
algae in water heavily enriched with carbon dioxide, which might be col-
lected from power stations or other industrial facilities. It takes much
less effort for plants to photosynthesize if the carbon dioxide has
already been concentrated for them. In a sunny spot in America, in ponds
fed with concentrated CO~2~ (concentrated to 10%), Ron Putt of Auburn
University says that algae can grow at 30 g per square metre per day,
producing 0.01 litres of biodiesel per square metre per day. This
corresponds to a power per unit pond area of 4 W/m^2^ – similar to the
Bavaria photovoltaic farm. If you wanted to drive a typical car (doing
12 km per litre) a distance of 50 km per day, then you’d need 420 square
metres of algae-ponds just to power your car; for comparison, the area
of the UK per person is 4000 square metres, of which 69 m^2^ is water
(figure 6.8). Please don’t forget that it’s essential to feed these
ponds with concentrated carbon dioxide. So this technology would be
limited both by land area – how much of the UK we could turn into algal
ponds – and by the availability of concentrated CO~2~, the capture of
which would have an energy cost (a topic discussed in Chap- ters 23 and
31). Let’s check the limit imposed by the concentrated CO~2~. To grow 30
g of algae per m^2^ per day would require at least 60 g of CO~2~ per
m^2^ per day (because the CO~2~ molecule has more mass per carbon atom
than the molecules in algae). If all the CO~2~ from all UK power
stations were captured (roughly 2^1^⁄~2~ tons per year per person), it
could service 230 square metres per
person[^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#285) of the
algal ponds described above – roughly 6% of the
country[^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#285). This
area would deliver biodiesel with a power of 24 kWh per day per person,
assuming that the numbers for sunny America apply here. A plausible
vision? Perhaps on one tenth of that scale? I’ll leave it to you to
decide.

### What about algae in the sea?

Remember what I just said: the algae-to-biodiesel posse always feed
their algae concentrated CO~2~. If you’re going out to sea, presumably
pumping CO~2~ into it won’t be an option. And without the concentrated
CO~2~, the productivity of algae drops 100-fold. For algae in the sea to
make a difference, a country-sized harvesting area in the sea would be
required.

### What about algae that produce hydrogen?

Trying to get slime to produce hydrogen in sunlight is a smart idea
because it cuts out a load of chemical steps normally performed by
carbohydrate- producing plants. Every chemical step reduces efficiency a
little. Hydrogen can be produced directly by the photosynthetic system,
right at step one. A research study from the National Renewable Energy
Laboratory in Colorado predicted that a reactor filled with
genetically-modified green algae, covering an area of 11 hectares in the
Arizona desert, could

produce 300 kg of hydrogen per day. Hydrogen contains 39 kWh per kg, so
this algae-to-hydrogen facility would deliver a power per unit area of
4.4 W/m^2^. Taking into account the estimated electricity required to
run the facility, the net power delivered would be reduced to 3.6
W/m^2^. That strikes me as still quite a promising number – compare it
with the Bavarian solar photovoltaic farm, for example (5 W/m^2^).

Food for humans or other animals
--------------------------------

Grain crops such as wheat, oats, barley, and corn have an energy density
of about 4 kWh per kg. In the UK, wheat yields of 7.7 tons per hectare
per year are typical. If the wheat is eaten by an animal, the power per
unit area of this process is 0.34 W/m^2^. If 2800
m^2^[^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#286) of Britain
(that’s all agricultural land) were devoted to the growth of crops like
these, the chemical energy generated would be about 24 kWh/d per person.

Incineration of agricultural by-products
----------------------------------------

We found a moment ago that the power per unit area of a biomass power
station burning the best energy crops is 0.2 W/m^2^. If instead we grow
crops for food, and put the left-overs that we don’t eat into a power
station – or if we feed the food to chickens and put the left-overs that
come out of the chickens’ back ends into a power station – what power
could be delivered per unit area of farmland? Let’s make a rough guess,
then take a look at some real data. For a wild guess, let’s imagine that
by-products are harvested from half of the area of Britain (2000 m^2^
per person) and trucked to power stations, and that general agricultural
by-products deliver 10% as much power per unit area as the best energy
crops: 0.02 W/m^2^. Multiplying this by 2000 m^2^ we get 1 kWh per day
per person.

Have I been unfair to agricultural garbage in making this wild guess? We
can re-estimate the plausible production from agricultural left-overs by
scaling up the prototype straw-burning power station at Elean in East
Anglia. Elean’s power output is 36 MW, and it uses 200 000 tons per year
from land located within a 50-mile radius. If we assume this density can
be replicated across the whole country, the Elean model offers 0.002
W/m^2^. At 4000 m^2^ per person, that’s 8 W per person, or 0.2 kWh/day
per person.

Let’s calculate this another way. UK straw production is 10 million tons
per year, or 0.46 kg per day per person. At 4.2 kWh per kg, this straw
has a chemical energy of 2 kWh per day per person. If all the straw were
burned in 30%-efficient power stations – a proposal that wouldn’t go
down well with farm animals, who have other uses for straw – the
electricity generated would be 0.6 kWh/d per person.

### Landfill methane gas

At present, much of the methane gas leaking out of rubbish tips comes
from biological materials, especially waste food. So, as long as we keep
throwing away things like food and newspapers, landfill gas is a
sustainable energy source – plus, burning that methane might be a good
idea from a climate-change perspective, since methane is a stronger
greenhouse-gas than CO~2~. A landfill site receiving 7.5 million tons of
household waste per year can generate 50 000 m^3^ per hour of methane.

In 1994, landfill methane emissions were estimated to be 0.05 m^3^ per
person per day, which has a chemical energy of 0.5 kWh/d per person, and
would generate 0.2 kWh(e)/d per person, if it were all converted to
electricity with 40% efficiency. Landfill gas emissions are declining
because of changes in legislation, and are now roughly 50% lower.

### Burning household waste

SELCHP (“South East London Combined Heat and Power”) [www.selchp. com]
is a 35 MW power station that is paid to burn 420 kt per year of black-
bag waste from the London area. They burn the waste as a whole, without
sorting. After burning, ferrous metals are removed for recycling,
hazardous wastes are filtered out and sent to a special landfill site,
and the remaining ash is sent for reprocessing into recycled material
for road building or construction use. The calorific value of the waste
is 2.5 kWh/kg, and the thermal efficiency of the power station is about
21%, so each 1 kg of waste gets turned into 0.5 kWh of electricity. The
carbon emissions are about 1000 g CO~2~ per kWh. Of the 35 MW generated,
about 4 MW is used by the plant itself to run its machinery and
filtering processes.

Scaling this idea up, if every borough had one of these, and if everyone
sent 1 kg per day of waste, then we’d get 0.5 kWh(e) per day per person
from waste incineration.

This is similar to the figure estimated above for methane capture at
landfill sites. And remember, we can’t have both. More waste
incineration means less methane gas leaking out of landfill sites. See
figure 27.2, p206, and figure 27.3, p207, for further data on waste
incineration.

Notes and further reading
-------------------------

page no.

283*The power per unit area of using willow, miscanthus, or poplar, for
electricity is 0.2 W/m^2^*. Source: Select Committee on Science and
Technology Minutes of Evidence – Memorandum from the Biotechnology &
Biological Sciences Research Council
[www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/ld200304/
ldselect/ldsctech/126/4032413.htm]. “Typically a sustainable crop of 10

![](figure285.png)

Figure D.4. SELCHP – your trash is their business.

dry t/ha/y of woody biomass can be produced in Northern Europe... . Thus
an area of 1 km^2^ will produce 1000 dry t/y – enough for a power output
150 kWe at low conversion efficiencies or 300 kWe at high conversion
efficiencies.” This means 0.15–0.3 W(e)/m^2^. See also Layzell et al.
(2006), [3ap7lc].

283*Oilseed rape.* Sources: Bayer Crop Science (2003), Evans (2007),
www.defra. gov.uk.

–*Sugar beet.* Source: statistics.defra.gov.uk/esg/default.asp

284*Bioethanol from corn.* Source: Shapouri et al. (1995).

–*Bioethanol from cellulose.* See also Mabee et al. (2006).

–*Jatropha.* Sources: Francis et al. (2005), Asselbergs et al. (2006).

285*In America, in ponds fed with concentrated CO~2~, algae can grow at
30 grams per square metre per day, producing 0.01 litres of biodiesel
per square metre per day.* Source: Putt (2007). This calculation has
ignored the energy cost of running the algae ponds and processing the
algae into biodiesel. Putt describes the energy balance of a proposed
design for a 100-acre algae farm, powered by methane from an animal
litter digester. The farm described would in fact produce less power
than the methane power input. The 100- acre farm would use 2600 kW of
methane, which corresponds to an input power density of 6.4 W/m^2^. To
recap, the power density of the output, in the form of biodiesel, would
be just 4.2 W/m^2^. All proposals to make biofuels should be approached
with a critical eye!

286*A research study from the National Renewable Energy Laboratory
predicted that genetically-modified green algae, covering an area of 11
hectares, could produce 300 kg of hydrogen per day.* Source: Amos
(2004).

–*Elean power station.* Source: Government White Paper (2003). Elean
Power Station (36 MW) – the UK’s first straw-fired power plant. *Straw
production:* www.biomassenergycentre.org.uk.

287*Landfill gas.* Sources: Matthew Chester, City University, London,
personal communication; Meadows (1996), Aitchison (1996); Alan Rosevear,
UK Rep- resentative on Methane to Markets Landfill Gas Sub-Committee,
May 2005 [4hamks].

![](figure505.png)

E   Heating II {.red}
==============

A perfectly sealed and insulated building would hold heat for ever and
thus would need no heating. The two dominant reasons why buildings lose
heat are:

1.  **Conduction** – heat flowing directly through walls, windows and
    doors;
2.  **Ventilation** – hot air trickling out through cracks, gaps, or
    deliberate ventilation ducts.

In the standard model for heat loss, both these heat flows are
proportional to the temperature difference between the air inside and
outside. For a typical British house, conduction is the bigger of the
two losses, as we’ll see.

### Conduction loss

The rate of conduction of heat through a wall, ceiling, floor, or window
is the product of three things: the area of the wall, a measure of
conductivity of the wall known in the trade as the “U-value” or thermal
transmittance, and the temperature difference –

power loss = area × *U* × temperature difference.

The U-value is usually measured in W/m^2^/K. (One kelvin (1 K) is the
same as one degree Celsius (1 °C).) Bigger U-values mean bigger losses
of power. The thicker a wall is, the smaller its U-value. Double-glazing
is about as good as a solid brick wall. (See table E.2.)

The U-values of objects that are “in series,” such as a wall and its
inner lining, can be combined in the same way that electrical
conductances combine:

![](E196.png)

There’s a worked example using this rule on page 296.

### Ventilation loss

To work out the heat required to warm up incoming cold air, we need the
heat capacity of air: 1.2 kJ/m^3^/K.

In the building trade, it’s conventional to describe the power-losses
caused by ventilation of a space as the product of the number of changes
*N* of the air per hour, the volume *V* of the space in cubic metres,
the heat capacity *C*, and the temperature difference ΔT between the
inside and

![](figure349.png)

  ---------- -----
  kitchen    2
  bathroom   2
  lounge     1
  bedroom    0.5
  ---------- -----

Table E.1. Air changes per hour: typical values of *N* for
draught-proofed rooms. The worst draughty rooms might have *N* = 3 air
changes per hour. The recommended minimum rate of air exchange is
between 0.5 and 1.0 air changes per hour, providing adequate fresh air
for human health, for safe combustion of fuels and to prevent damage to
the building fabric from excess moisture in the air (EST 2003).

U-values (W/m^2^/K)

 

old buildings

modern standards

best methods

Walls

 

0.45-0.6

0.12

   solid masonry wall

2.4

 

 

   outer wall: 9 inch solid brick

2.2

 

 

   11 inch brick-block cavity wall, unfilled

1.0

 

 

   11 inch brick-block cavity wall, insulated

0.6

 

 

Floors

 

0.45

0.14

   suspended timber floor

0.7

 

 

   solid concrete floor

0.8

 

 

Roofs

 

0.25

0.12

   flat roof with 25 mm insulation

0.9

 

 

   pitched roof with 100 mm insulation

0.3

 

 

Windows

 

 

1.5

   single-glazed

5.0

 

 

   double-glazed

2.9

 

 

   double-glazed, 20 mm gap

1.7

 

 

   triple-glazed

0.7-0.9

 

 

outside of the building

![](E197-0-0.png)

(E.1)

(E.2)

(E.3)

### Energy loss and temperature demand (degree-days)

Since energy is power × time, you can write the energy lost by
*conduction* through an area in a short duration as

energy loss = area × *U* × (Δ*T* × duration),

and the energy lost by *ventilation* as

^1^⁄~3~ *NV* × (Δ*T* × duration).

Both these energy losses have the form

Something × (Δ*T* × duration),

Table E.2. U-values of walls, floors,roofs, and windows.

![](figure286.png)

where the “Something” is measured in watts per °C. As day turns to
night, and seasons pass, the temperature difference Δ*T* changes; we can
think of a long period as being chopped into lots of small durations,
during each of which the temperature difference is roughly constant.
From duration to duration, the temperature difference changes, but the
Somethings don’t change. When predicting a space’s total energy loss due
to conduction and ventilation over a long period we thus need to
multiply two things:

1.  the sum of all the Somethings (adding area × *U* for all walls,
    roofs, floors, doors, and windows, and ^1^⁄~3~ *NV* for the volume);
    and
2.  the sum of all the Temperature difference × duration factors (for
    all the durations).

The first factor is a property of the building measured in watts per °C.
I’ll call this the *leakiness* of the building. (This leakiness is
sometimes called the building’s *heat-loss coefficient*.) The second
factor is a property of the weather; it’s often expressed as a number of
“degree-days,” since temperature difference is measured in degrees, and
days are a convenient unit for thinking about durations. For example, if
your house interior is at 18 °C, and the outside temperature is 8 °C for
a week, then we say that that

Figure E.3. U-values required by British and Swedish building
regulations.

![](figure287.png)

week contributed 10 × 7 = 70 degree-days to the (Δ*T* ×duration) sum.
I’ll call the sum of all the (Δ*T* × duration) factors the *temperature
demand* of a period.

energy lost = leakiness × temperature demand.

We can reduce our energy loss by reducing the leakiness of the building,
or by reducing our temperature demand, or both. The next two sections
look more closely at these two factors, using a house in Cambridge as a
case-study.

There is a third factor we must also discuss. The lost energy is replen-
ished by the building’s heating system, and by other sources of energy
such as the occupants, their gadgets, their cookers, and the sun.
Focussing on the heating system, the energy *delivered* by the heating
is not the same as the energy *consumed* by the heating. They are
related by the *coefficient of performance* of the heating system.

energy consumed = energy delivered/coefficient of performance.

For a condensing boiler burning natural gas, for example, the
coefficient of performance is 90%, because 10% of the energy is lost up
the chimney.

To summarise, we can reduce the energy consumption of a building in
three ways:

1.  by reducing temperature demand;
2.  by reducing leakiness; or
3.  by increasing the coefficient of performance.

We now quantify the potential of these options. (A fourth option –
increas- ing the building’s incidental heat gains, especially from the
sun – may also be useful, but I won’t address it here.)

Figure E.4. The temperature demand in Cambridge, 2006, visualized as an
area on a graph of daily average temperatures. (a) Thermostat set to 20
°C, including cooling in summer; (b) winter thermostat set to 17 °C.

![](figure288.png)

Figure E.5. Temperature demand in Cambridge, in degree-days per year, as
a function of thermostat setting (°C). Reducing the winter thermostat
from 20 °C to 17 °C reduces the temperature demand of heating by 30%,
from 3188 to 2265 degree-days. Raising the summer thermostat from 20 °C
to 23 °C reduces the temperature demand of cooling by 82%, from 91 to 16
degree-days.

### Temperature demand

We can visualize the temperature demand nicely on a graph of external
temperature versus time (figure E.4). For a building held at a
temperature of 20 °C, the total temperature demand is the *area* between
the horizontal line at 20 °C and the external temperature. In figure
E.4a, we see that, for one year in Cambridge, holding the temperature at
20 °C year-round had a temperature demand of 3188 degree-days of heating
and 91 degree-days of cooling. These pictures allow us easily to assess
the effect of turning down the thermostat and living without
air-conditioning. Turning the winter thermostat down to 17 °C, the
temperature demand for heating drops from 3188 degree-days to 2265
degree-days (figure E.4b), which corresponds to a 30% reduction in
heating demand. Turning the thermostat down to 15 °C reduces the
temperature demand from 3188 to 1748 degree days, a 45% reduction.

These calculations give us a ballpark indication of the benefit of
turning down thermostats, but will give an exact prediction only if we
take into account two details: first, buildings naturally absorb energy
from the sun, boosting the inside above the outside temperature, even
without any heat- ing; and second, the occupants and their gadget
companions emit heat, so further cutting down the artificial heating
requirements. The temper- ature demand of a location, as conventionally
expressed in degree-days, is a bit of an unwieldy thing. I find it hard
to remember numbers like “3500degree-days.” And academics may find the
degree-day a distressing unit, since they already have another meaning
for degree days (one involving dressing up in gowns and mortar boards).
We can make this quantity more meaningful and perhaps easier to work
with by dividing it by 365, the number of days in the year, obtaining
the temperature demand in “degree-days per day,” or, if you prefer, in
plain “degrees.” Figure E.6 shows this replotted temperature demand.
Expressed this way, the tem- perature demand is simply the *average*
temperature difference between in- side and outside. The highlighted
temperature demands are: 8.7 °C, for a thermostat setting of 20 °C; 6.2
°C, for a setting of 17 °C; and 4.8 °C, for a setting of 15 °C.

### Leakiness – example: my house

My house is a three-bedroom semi-detached house built about 1940 (figure
E.7). By 2006, its kitchen had been slightly extended, and most of the
windows were double-glazed. The front door and back door were both still
single-glazed.

My estimate of the leakiness in 2006 is built up as shown in table E.8.
The total leakiness of the house was 322 W/°C (or 7.7 kWh/d/.C), with
conductive leakiness accounting for 72% and ventilation leakiness for
28% of the total. The conductive leakiness is roughly equally divided
into three parts: windows; walls; and floor and ceiling.

![](figure289.png)

Figure E.6. The temperature demand in Cambridge, 2006, replotted in
units of degree-days per day, also known as degrees. In these units, the
temperature demand is just the average of the temperature difference
between inside and outside.

![](figure290.png)

Figure E.7. My house.

CONDUCTIVE LEAKINESS

area (m^2^)

U-value (W/m^2^/°C)

leakiness (W/°C)

Horizontal surfaces

   Pitched roof

48

0.6

28.8

   Flat roof

1.6

3

4.8

   Floor

50

0.8

40

Vertical surfaces

   Extension walls

24.1

0.6

14.5

   Main walls

50

1

50

   Thin wall (5in)

2

3

6

   Single-glazed doors and windows

7.35

5

36.7

   Double-glazed windows

17.8

2.9

51.6

Total conductive leakiness

232.4

  VENTILATION LEAKINESS         volume (m^3^)   N (air-changes per hour)   leakiness (W/°C)
  ----------------------------- --------------- -------------------------- ------------------
  Bedrooms                      80              0.5                        13.3
  Kitchen                       36              2                          24
  Hall                          27              3                          27
  Other rooms                   77              1                          25.7
  Total ventilation leakiness                                              90

To compare the leakinesses of two buildings that have different floor
areas, we can divide the leakiness by the floor area; this gives the
*heat-loss parameter* of the building, which is measured in W/°C/m^2^.
The heat-loss parameter of this house (total floor area 88 m^2^) is

3.7 W/°C/m^2^.

Let’s use these figures to estimate the house’s daily energy consumption
on a cold winter’s day, and year-round.

On a cold day, assuming an external temperature of -1 °C and an internal
temperature of 19 °C, the temperature difference is Δ*T* = 20 °C. If
this difference is maintained for 6 hours per day then the energy lost
per day is

322 W/°C × 120 degree-hours  ≅  39 kWh.

If the temperature is maintained at 19 °C for 24 hours per day, the
energy lost per day is

155 kWh/d.

To get a year-round heat-loss figure, we can take the temperature demand
of Cambridge from figure E.5. With the thermostat at 19 °C, the

Table E.8. Breakdown of my house’s conductive leakiness, and its
ventilation leakiness, pre-2006. I’ve treated the central wall of the
semi-detached house as a perfect insulating wall, but this may be wrong
if the gap between the adjacent houses is actually well-ventilated. I’ve
highlighted the parameters that I altered after 2006, in modifications
to be described shortly.

temperature demand in 2006 was 2866 degree-days. The average rate of
heat loss, if the house is always held at 19 °C, is therefore:

7.7 kWh/d/°C × 2866 degree-days/y/(365 days/y) = 61 kWh/d.

Turning the thermostat down to 17 °C, the average rate of heat loss
drops to 48 kWh/d. Turning it up to a tropical 21 °C, the average rate
of heat loss is 75 kWh/d.

##### Effects of extra insulation

During 2007, I made the following modifications to the house:

1.  Added cavity-wall insulation (which was missing in the main walls of
    the house) – figure 21.5.
2.  Increased the insulation in the roof.
3.  Added a new front door outside the old – figure 21.6.
4.  Replaced the back door with a double-glazed one.
5.  Double-glazed the one window that was still single-glazed.

What’s the predicted change in heat loss?

The total leakiness before the changes was 322 W/°C.

Adding cavity-wall insulation (new U-value 0.6) to the main walls re-
duces the house’s leakiness by 20 W/°C. The improved loft insulation
(new U-value 0.3) should reduce the leakiness by 14 W/°C. The glazing
modi- fications (new U-value 1.6–1.8) should reduce the conductive
leakiness by 23 W/°C, and the ventilation leakiness by something like 24
W/°C. That’s a total reduction in leakiness of 25%, from roughly 320 to
240 W/°C (7.7 to 6 kWh/d/°C). Table E.9 shows the predicted savings from
each of the modifications.

The heat-loss parameter of this house (total floor area 88 m^2^) is thus
hopefully reduced by about 25%, from 3.7 to 2.7 W/°C/m^2^. (This is a
long way from the 1.1 W/°C/m^2^ required of a “sustainable” house in the
new building codes.)

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------
  – Cavity-wall insulation (applicable to two-thirds     of the wall area)                  4.8 kWh/d
  – Improved roof insulation                                                                3.5 kWh/d
  – Reduction in conduction from double-glazing     two doors and one window                1.9 kWh/d
  – Ventilation reductions in hall and kitchen from     improvements to doors and windows   2.9 kWh/d
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------

Table E.9. Break-down of the predicted reductions in heat loss from my
house, on a cold winter day.

It’s frustratingly hard to make a really big dent in the leakiness of an
already-built house! As we saw a moment ago, a much easier way of
achieving a big dent in heat loss is to turn the thermostat down.
Turning down from 20 to 17 °C gave a reduction in heat loss of 30%.

Combining these two actions – the physical modifications and the turn-
ing-down of the thermostat – this model predicts that heat loss should
be reduced by nearly 50%. Since some heat is generated in a house by
sunshine, gadgets, and humans, the reduction in gas consumption should
be more than 50%.

I made all these changes to my house and monitored my meters every week.
I can confirm that my heating bill indeed went down by more than 50%. As
figure 21.4 showed, my gas consumption has gone down from 40 kWh/d to 13
kWh/d – a reduction of 67%.

##### Leakiness reduction by internal wall-coverings

Can you reduce your walls’ leakiness by covering the *inside* of the
wall with insulation? The answer is yes, but there may be two
complications. First, the thickness of internal covering is bigger than
you might expect. To transform an existing nine-inch solid brick wall
(U-value 2.2 W/m^2^/K) into a decent 0.30 W/m^2^/K wall, roughly 6 cm of
insulated lining board is required. [65h3cb] Second, condensation may
form on the hidden surface of such internal insulation layers, leading
to damp problems.

If you’re not looking for such a big reduction in wall leakiness, you
can get by with a thinner internal covering. For example, you can buy
1.8-cm- thick insulated wallboards with a U-value of 1.7 W/m^2^/K. With
these over the existing wall, the U-value would be reduced from 2.2
W/m^2^/K to:

![](E207.png)

Definitely a worthwhile reduction.

Air-exchange
------------

Once a building is really well insulated, the principal loss of heat
will be through ventilation (air changes) rather than through
conduction. The heat loss through ventilation can be reduced by
transferring the heat from the outgoing air to the incoming air.
Remarkably, a great deal of this heat can indeed be transferred without
any additional energy being required. The trick is to use a nose, as
discovered by natural selection. A nose warms incoming air by cooling
down outgoing air. There’s a temperature gradient along the nose; the
walls of a nose are coldest near the nostrils. The longer your nose, the
better it works as a counter-current heat exchanger. In nature’s noses,
the direction of the air-flow usually alternates. Another way to
organize a nose is to have two air-passages, one for in-flow and

one for out-flow, separate from the point of view of air, but tightly
coupled with each other so that heat can easily flow between the two
passages. This is how the noses work in buildings. It’s conventional to
call these noses heat-exchangers.

An energy-efficient house
-------------------------

In 1984, an energy consultant, Alan Foster, built an energy-efficient
house near Cambridge; he kindly gave me his thorough measurements. The
house is a timber-framed bungalow based on a Scandinavian “Heatkeeper
Serrekunda” design (figure E.10), with a floor area of 140 m^2^,
composed of three bedrooms, a study, two bathrooms, a living room, a
kitchen, and a lobby. The wooden outside walls were supplied in kit form
by a Scottish company, and the main parts of the house took only a few
days to build.

The walls are 30 cm thick and have a U-value of 0.28 W/m^2^/°C. From the
inside out, they consist of 13 mm of plasterboard, 27 mm airspace, a
vapour barrier, 8 mm of plywood, 90 mm of rockwool, 12 mm of bitumen-
impregnated fibreboard, 50 mm cavity, and 103 mm of brick. The ceiling
construction is similar with 100–200 mm of rockwool insulation. The
ceil- ing has a U-value of 0.27 W/m^2^/°C, and the floor, 0.22
W/m^2^/°C. The windows are double-glazed (U-value 2 W/m^2^/°C), with the
inner panes’ outer surfaces specially coated to reduce radiation. The
windows are ar- ranged to give substantial solar gain, contributing
about 30% of the house’s space-heating.

The house is well sealed, every door and window lined with neoprene
gaskets. The house is heated by warm air pumped through floor grilles;
in winter, pumps remove used air from several rooms, exhausting it to
the outside, and they take in air from the loft space. The incoming air
and outgoing air pass through a heat exchanger (figure E.11), which
saves 60% of the heat in the extracted air. The heat exchanger is a
passive device, using no energy: it’s like a big metal nose, warming the
incoming air with the outgoing air. On a cold winter’s day, the outside
air temperature was -8 °C, the temperature in the loft’s air intake was
0 °C, and the air coming out of the heat exchanger was at +8 °C.

For the first decade, the heat was supplied entirely by electric
heaters, heating a 150-gallon heat store during the overnight economy
period. More recently a gas supply was brought to the house, and the
space heating is now obtained from a condensing boiler.

The heat loss through conduction and ventilation is 4.2 kWh/d/°C. The
*heat loss parameter* (the leakiness per square metre of floor area) is
1.25 W/m^2^/°C (cf. my house’s 2.7 W/°C/m^2^).

With the house occupied by two people, the average space-heating
consumption, with the thermostat set at 19 or 20 °C during the day, was
8100 kWh per year, or 22 kWh/d; the total energy consumption for all
pur- poses was about 15 000 kWh per year, or 40 kWh/d. Expressed as an
aver-

![](figure292.png)

Figure E.10. The Heatkeeper Serrekunda.

![](figure293.png)

Figure E.11. The Heatkeeper’s heat-exchanger.

age power per unit area, that’s 6.6
W/m^2^.[^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#298)

Figure E.12 compares the power consumption per unit area of this
Heatkeeper house with my house (before and after my efficiency push) and
with the European average. My house’s post-efficiency-push con- sumption
is close to that of the Heatkeeper, thanks to the adoption of lower
thermostat settings.

Benchmarks for houses and offices
---------------------------------

The German Passivhaus standard aims for power consumption for heating
and cooling of 15 kWh/m^2^/y, which is 1.7 W/m^2^; and total power con-
sumption of 120 kWh/m^2^/y, which is 13.7 W/m^2^.

The average energy consumption of the UK service sector, per unit floor
area, is 30 W/m^2^.

### An energy-efficient office

The National Energy Foundation built themselves a low-cost low-energy
building. It has solar panels for hot water, solar photovoltaic (PV)
panels generating up to 6.5 kW of electricity, and is heated by a 14-kW
ground- source heat pump and occasionally by a wood stove. The floor
area is 400m^2^ and the number of occupants is about 30. It is a
single-storey build- ing. The walls contain 300mm of rockwool
insulation. The heat pump’s coefficient of performance in winter was
2.5. The energy used is 65 kWh per year per square metre of floor area
(7.4 W/m^2^). The PV system delivers almost 20% of this energy.

### Contemporary offices

New office buildings are often hyped up as being amazingly environment-
friendly. Let’s look at some numbers.

The William Gates building at Cambridge University holds computer
science researchers, administrators, and a small café. Its area is 11
110 m^2^, and its energy consumption is 2392 MWh/y. That’s a power per
unit area of 215 kWh/m^2^/y, or 25 W/m^2^. This building won a RIBA
award in 2001 for its predicted energy consumption. “The architects have
incorporated many environmentally friendly features into the building.”
[5dhups]

But are these buildings impressive? Next door, the Rutherford building,
built in the 1970s without any fancy eco-claims – indeed without even
double glazing – has a floor area of 4998 m^2^ and consumes 1557 MWh per
year; that’s 0.85 kWh/d/m^2^, or 36 W/m^2^. So the award-winning
building is just 30% better, in terms of power per unit area, than its
simple 1970s cousin. Figure E.12 compares these buildings and another
new building, the Law Faculty, with the Old Schools, which are ancient
offices built pre-

![](figure291.png)

Figure E.12. Building benchmarks. Power used per unit area in various
homes and
offices.[^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#299)

![](figure294.png)

​1890. For all the fanfare, the difference between the new and the old
is really quite disappointing!

Notice that the building power consumptions, per unit floor area, are in
just the same units (W/m^2^) as the renewable powers per unit area that
we discussed on pages 43, 47, and 177. Comparing these consumption and
production numbers helps us realize how difficult it is to power modern
buildings entirely from on-site renewables. The power per unit area of
biofuels (figure 6.11, p43) is 0.5 W/m^2^; of wind farms, 2 W/m^2^; of
solar photovoltaics, 20 W/m^2^ (figure 6.18, p47); only solar hot-water
panels come in at the right sort of power per unit area, 53 W/m^2^
(figure 6.3, p39).

Improving the coefficient of performance
----------------------------------------

You might think that the coefficient of performance of a condensing
boiler, 90%, sounds pretty hard to beat. But it can be significantly
improved upon, by heat pumps. Whereas the condensing boiler takes
chemical energy and turns 90% of it into useful heat, the heat pump
takes some electrical energy and uses it to *move* heat from one place
to another (for example, from outside a building to inside). Usually the
amount of useful heat delivered is much bigger than the amount of
electricity used. A coefficient of performance of 3 or 4 is normal.

Figure E.13. Ideal heat pump efficiencies. Top left: ideal electrical
energy required, according to the limits of thermodynamics, to pump heat
*out* of a place at temperature *T*~in~ when the heat is being pumped to
a place at temperature *T*~out~ = 35 °C. Right: ideal electrical energy
required to pump heat *into* a place at temperature *T*~in~ when the
heat is being pumped from a place at temperature *T*~out~ = 0 °C. Bottom
row: the efficiency is conventionally expressed as a “coefficient of
performance,” which is the heat pumped per unit electrical energy. In
practice, I understand that well-installed ground-source heat pumps and
the best air-source heat pumps usually have a coefficient of performance
of 3 or 4; however, government regulations in Japan have driven the
coefficient of performance as high as 6.6.

### Theory of heat pumps

Here are the formulae for the ideal efficiency of a heat pump, that is,
the electrical energy required per unit of heat pumped. If we are
pumping heat from an outside place at temperature *T*~1~ into a place at
higher temperature *T*~2~, both temperatures being expressed relative to
absolute zero (that is, *T*~2~, in kelvin, is given in terms of the
Celsius temperature *T*~in~, by 273.15 + *T*~in~), the ideal efficiency
is:

![](E208.png)

If we are pumping heat out from a place at temperature *T*~2~ to a
warmer exterior at temperature *T*~1~, the ideal efficiency is:

![](E209.png)

These theoretical limits could only be achieved by systems that pump
heat infinitely slowly. Notice that the ideal efficiency is bigger, the
closer the inside temperature *T*~2~ is to the outside temperature
*T*~1~.

While in theory ground-source heat pumps might have better perfor- mance
than air-source, because the ground temperature is usually closer than
the air temperature to the indoor temperature, in practice an air-
source heat pump might be the best and simplest choice. In cities, there
may be uncertainty about the future effectiveness of ground-source heat
pumps, because the more people use them in winter, the colder the ground
gets; this thermal fly-tipping problem may also show up in the summer in
cities where too many buildings use ground-source (or should I say
“ground-sink”?) heat pumps for air-conditioning.

Heating and the ground
----------------------

Here’s an interesting calculation to do. Imagine having solar heating
pan- els on your roof, and, whenever the water in the panels gets above
50 °C, pumping the water through a large rock under your house. When a
dreary grey cold month comes along, you could then use the heat in the
rock to warm your house. Roughly how big a 50 °C rock would you need to
hold enough energy to heat a house for a whole month? Let’s assume we’re
after 24 kWh per day for 30 days and that the house is at 16 °C. The
heat capacity of granite is 0.195 × 4200 J/kg/K = 820 J/kg/K. The mass
of granite required is:

![](E211.png)

100 tonnes, which corresponds to a cuboid of rock of size 6 m × 6 m × 1
m.

Heat capacity:

*C* = 820 J/kg/K

Conductivity:

*κ* = 2.1 W/m/K

Density:

*ρ* = 2750 kg/m^3^

Heat capacity per unit volume:

 

*C*~V~ = 2.3 MJ/m^3^/K

Table E.14. Vital statistics for granite. (I use granite as an example
of a typical rock.)

### Ground storage without walls

OK, we’ve established the size of a useful ground store. But is it
difficult to keep the heat in? Would you need to surround your rock
cuboid with lots of insulation? It turns out that the ground itself is a
pretty good insulator. A spike of heat put down a hole in the ground
will spread as

![](E212.png)

where *κ* is the conductivity of the ground, *C* is its heat capacity,
and *ρ* is its density. This describes a bell-shaped curve with width

![](E214.png)

for example, after six months (*t* = 1.6 × 10^7^ s), using the figures
for granite (*C* = 0.82 kJ/kg/K, *ρ* = 2500 kg/m^3^, *κ* = 2.1 W/m/K),
the width is 6 m.

Using the figures for water (*C* = 4.2 kJ/kg/K, *ρ* = 1000 kg/m^3^, *κ*
= 0.6 W/m/K), the width is 2 m.

So if the storage region is bigger than 20 m × 20 m × 20 m then most of
the heat stored will still be there in six months time (because 20 m is
significantly bigger than 6 m and 2 m).

### Limits of ground-source heat pumps

The low thermal conductivity of the ground is a double-edged sword.
Thanks to low conductivity, the ground holds heat well for a long time.
But on the other hand, low conductivity means that it’s not easy to
shove heat in and out of the ground rapidly. We now explore how the
conductivity of the ground limits the use of ground-source heat pumps.

Consider a neighbourhood with quite a high population density. Can
*everyone* use ground-source heat pumps, without using active summer re-
plenishment (as discussed on p152)? The concern is that if we all sucked
heat from the ground at the same time, we might freeze the ground solid.
I’m going to address this question by two calculations. First, I’ll work
out the natural flux of energy in and out of the ground in summer and
winter.

![](figure295.png)

(W/m/K)

water

0.6

quartz

8

granite

2.1

earth's crust

1.7

dry soil

0.14

Table E.15. Thermal conductivities. For more data see table E.18, p304.

Figure E.16. The temperature in Cambridge, 2006, and a cartoon, which
says the temperature is the sum of an annual sinusoidal variation
between 3 °C and 20 °C, and a daily sinusoidal variation with range up
to 10.3 °C. The average temperature is 11.5 °C.

If the flux we want to suck out of the ground in winter is much bigger
than these natural fluxes then we know that our sucking is going to
signif- icantly alter ground temperatures, and may thus not be feasible.
For this calculation, I’ll assume the ground just below the surface is
held, by the combined influence of sun, air, cloud, and night sky, at a
temperature that varies slowly up and down during the year (figure
E.16).

### Response to external temperature variations

Working out how the temperature inside the ground responds, and what the
flux in or out is, requires some advanced mathematics, which I’ve
cordoned off in box E.19 (p306).

The payoff from this calculation is a rather beautiful diagram (figure
E.17) that shows how the temperature varies in time at each depth. This
diagram shows the answer for any material in terms of the *character-
istic length-scale* *z*~0~ (equation (E.7)), which depends on the
conductivity *κ* and heat capacity *C*~V~ of the material, and on the
frequency *ω* of the external temperature variations. (We can choose to
look at either daily and yearly variations using the same theory.) At a
depth of 2*z*~0~, the variations in temperature are one seventh of those
at the surface, and lag them by about one third of a cycle (figure
E.17). At a depth of 3*z*~0~, the variations in temperature are one
twentieth of those at the surface, and lag them by half a cycle.

For the case of daily variations and solid granite, the characteristic
length-scale is *z*~0~ = 0.16 m. (So 32 cm of rock is the thickness you
need to ride out external daily temperature oscillations.) For yearly
variations and solid granite, the characteristic length-scale is *z*~0~
= 3 m.

Let’s focus on annual variations and discuss a few other materials.
Characteristic length-scales for various materials are in the third
column of table E.18. For damp sandy soils or concrete, the
characteristic length- scale *z*~0~ is similar to that of granite –
about 2.6 m. In dry or peaty soils, the length-scale *z*~0~ is shorter –
about 1.3 m. That’s perhaps good news because it means you don’t have to
dig so deep to find ground with a stable tem- perature. But it’s also
coupled with some bad news: the natural fluxes are smaller in dry soils.

The natural flux varies during the year and has a peak value (equation
(E.9)) that is smaller, the smaller the conductivity.

For the case of solid granite, the peak flux is 8 W/m^2^. For dry soils,
the peak flux ranges from 0.7 W/m^2^ to 2.3 W/m^2^. For damp soils, the
peak flux ranges from 3 W/m^2^ to 8 W/m^2^.

What does this mean? I suggest we take a flux in the middle of these
numbers, 5 W/m^2^, as a useful benchmark, giving guidance about what
sort of power we could expect to extract, per unit area, with a ground-
source heat pump. If we suck a flux significantly smaller than 5 W/m^2^,
the perturbation we introduce to the natural flows will be small. If on
the

![](figure296.png)

Figure E.17. Temperature (in °C) versus depth and time. The depths are
given in units of the characteristic depth *z*~0~, which for granite and
annual variations is 3 m. At “depth 2” (6 m), the temperature is always
about 11 or 12 °C. At “depth 1” (3 m), it wobbles between 8 and 15 °C.

(typical of damp clay soil),

![](E218.png)

If, as above, we assume a population density corresponding to 160 m^2^
per person, then the maximum power per person deliverable by
ground-source heat pumps, if everyone in a neighbourhood has them, is
480 W, which is 12 kWh/d per person.

So again we come to the conclusion that in a typical suburban area
composed of poorly insulated houses like mine, *not everyone can use
ground- source heat pumps*, unless they are careful to actively dump
heat back into the ground during the summer. And in cities with higher
population density, ground-source heat pumps are unlikely to be viable.

I therefore suggest air-source heat pumps are the best heating choice
for most people.

Thermal mass
------------

Does increasing the thermal mass of a building help reduce its heating
and cooling bills? It depends. The outdoor temperature can vary during
the day by about 10 °C. A building with large thermal mass – thick stone
walls, for example – will naturally ride out those variations in
temperature, and, without heating or cooling, will have a temperature
close to the average outdoor temperature. Such buildings, in the UK,
need neither heating nor cooling for many months of the year. In
contrast, a poorly-insulated building with low thermal mass might be
judged too hot during the day and too cool at night, leading to greater
expenditure on cooling and heating.

However, large thermal mass is not always a boon. If a room is occupied
in winter for just a couple of hours a day (think of a lecture room for
example), the energy cost of warming the room up to a comfortable
temperature will be greater, the greater the room’s thermal mass. This
extra invested heat will linger for longer in a thermally massive room,
but if nobody is there to enjoy it, it’s wasted heat. So in the case of
infrequently-used rooms it makes sense to aim for a structure with low
thermal mass, and to warm that small mass rapidly when required.

Notes and further reading
-------------------------

page no.

304*Table E.18.* Sources: Bonan (2002),
www.hukseflux.com/thermalScience/thermalConductivity.html

F   Waves II {.green}
============

The physics of deep-water waves
-------------------------------

Waves contain energy in two forms: potential energy, and kinetic energy.
The potential energy is the energy required to move all the water from
the troughs to the crests. The kinetic energy is associated with the
water moving around.

People sometimes assume that when the crest of a wave moves across an
ocean at 30miles per hour, the water in that crest must also be moving
at 30miles per hour in the same direction. But this isn’t so. It’s just
like a Mexican wave. When the wave rushes round the stadium, the humans
who are making the wave aren’t themselves moving round the stadium: they
just bob up and down a little. The motion of a piece of water in the
ocean is similar: if you focused on a bit of seaweed floating in the
water as waves go by, you’d see that the seaweed moves up and down, and
also a little to and fro in the direction of travel of the wave – the
exact effect could be recreated in a Mexican wave if people moved like
window- cleaners, polishing a big piece of glass in a circular motion.
The wave has potential energy because of the elevation of the crests
above the troughs. And it has kinetic energy because of the small
circular bobbing motion of the water.

Our rough calculation of the power in ocean waves will require three
ingredients: an estimate of the period *T* of the waves (the time
between crests), an estimate of the height *h* of the waves, and a
physics formula that tells us how to work out the speed *v* of the wave
from its period.

The wavelength *λ* and period of the waves (the distance and time re-
spectively between two adjacent crests) depend on the speed of the wind
that creates the waves, as shown in figure F.1. The height of the waves
doesn’t depend on the windspeed; rather, it depends on how long the wind
has been caressing the water surface.

You can estimate the period of ocean waves by recalling the time be-
tween waves arriving on an ocean beach. Is 10 seconds reasonable? For
the height of ocean waves, let’s assume an amplitude of 1 m, which means
2 m from trough to crest. In waves this high, a man in a dinghy can’t
see beyond the nearest crest when he’s in a trough; I think this height
is bigger than average, but we can revisit this estimate if we decide
it’s important. The speed of deep-water waves is related to the time *T*
between crests by the physics formula (see Faber (1995), p170):

![](E226.png)

where *g* is the acceleration of gravity (9.8 m/s^2^). For example, if
*T* = 10 seconds, then *v* = 16 m/s. The wavelength of such a wave – the
distance between crests – is *λ* = *vT* = *gT*^2^/2π = 160 m.

![](figure298.png)

Figure F.1. Facts about deep-water waves. In all four figures the
horizontal axis is the wave speed in m/s. From top to bottom the graphs
show: wind speed (in m/s) required to make a wave with this wave speed;
period (in seconds) of a wave; wavelength (in m) of a wave; and power
density (in kW/m) of a wave with amplitude 1 m.

![](figure297.png)

For a wave of wavelength *λ* and period *T*, if the height of each crest
and depth of each trough is *h* = 1 m, the potential energy passing per
unit time, per unit length, is

![](E227-0-0.png)

(F.1)

where *m*\* is the mass per unit length, which is roughly
^1^⁄~2~*ρh*(*λ*/2) (approx- imating the area of the shaded crest in
figure F.2 by the area of a triangle), and *h* is the change in height
of the centre-of-mass of the chunk of elevated water, which is roughly
*h*. So

![](E229-0-0.png)

(F.2)

To find the potential energy properly, we should have done an integral
here; it would have given the same answer.) Now *λ/T* is simply the
speed at which the wave travels, *v*, so:

![](E230-0-0.png)

(F.3)

Waves have kinetic energy as well as potential energy, and, remarkably,
these are exactly equal, although I don’t show that calculation here; so
the total power of the waves is double the power calculated from
potential

Figure F.2. A wave has energy in two forms: potential energy associated
with raising water out of the light-shaded troughs into the heavy-shaded
crests; and kinetic energy of all the water within a few wavelengths of
the surface – the speed of the water is indicated by the small arrows.
The speed of the wave, travelling from left to right, is indicated by
the much bigger arrow at the top.

energy.

![](E231-0-0.png)

(F.4)

There’s only one thing wrong with this answer: it’s too big, because
we’ve neglected a strange property of dispersive waves: the energy in
the wave doesn’t actually travel at the same speed as the crests; it
travels at a speed called the group velocity, which for deep-water waves
is *half* of the speed *v*. You can see that the energy travels slower
than the crests by chucking a pebble in a pond and watching the
expanding waves carefully. What this means is that equation (F.4) is
wrong: we need to halve it. The correct power per unit length of
wave-front is

![](E232-0-0.png)

(F.5)

Plugging in *v* = 16 m/s and *h* = 1 m, we find

![](E233-0-0.png)

(F.6)

This rough estimate agrees with real measurements in the Atlantic
(Molli- son, 1986). (See p75.)

The losses from viscosity are minimal: a wave of 9 seconds period would
have to go three times round the world to lose 10% of its amplitude.

Real wave power systems
-----------------------

### Deep-water devices

How effective are real systems at extracting power from waves? Stephen
Salter’s “duck” has been well characterized: a row of 16-m diameter
ducks, feeding off Atlantic waves with an average power of 45 kW/m,
would deliver 19 kW/m, including transmission to central Scotland
(Mollison, 1986).

The Pelamis device, created by Ocean Power Delivery, has taken over the
Salter duck’s mantle as the leading floating deep-water wave device.
Each snake-like device is 130 m long and is made of a chain of four
segments, each 3.5 m in diameter. It has a maximum power output of 750
kW. The Pelamises are designed to be moored in a depth of about 50 m. In
a wavefarm, 39 devices in three rows would face the principal wave
direction, occupying an area of ocean, about 400 m long and 2.5 km wide
(an area of 1 km^2^). The effective cross-section of a single Pelamis is
7 m (i.e., for good waves, it extracts 100% of the energy that would
cross 7 m). The company says that such a wave-farm would deliver about
10 kW/m.

### Shallow-water devices

Typically 70% of energy in ocean waves is lost through bottom-friction
as the depth decreases from 100 m to 15 m. So the average wave-power per
unit length of coastline in shallow waters is reduced to about 12 kW/m.
The Oyster, developed by Queen’s University Belfast and Aquamarine Power
Ltd [www.aquamarinepower.com], is a bottom-mounted flap, about 12 m
high, that is intended to be deployed in waters about 12 m deep, in
areas where the average incident wave power is greater than 15 kW/m. Its
peak power is 600 kW. A single device would produce about 270 kW in wave
heights greater than 3.5 m. It’s predicted that an Oyster would have a
bigger power per unit mass of hardware than a Pelamis.

Oysters could also be used to directly drive reverse-osmosis desalina-
tion facilities. “The peak freshwater output of an Oyster desalinator is
between 2000 and 6000 m^3^/day.” That production has a value, going by
the Jersey facility (which uses 8 kWh per m^3^), equivalent to 600–2000
kW of electricity.

G   Tide II {.green}
===========

Power density of tidal pools
----------------------------

To estimate the power of an artificial tide-pool, imagine that it’s
filled rapidly at high tide, and emptied rapidly at low tide. Power is
generated in both directions, on the ebb and on the flood. (This is
called two-way generation or double-effect generation.) The change in
potential energy of the water, each six hours, is *mgh*, where *h* is
the change in height of the centre of mass of the water, which is half
the range. (The range is the difference in height between low and high
tide; figure G.1.) The mass per unit area covered by tide-pool is *ρ* ×
(2*h*), where *ρ* is the density of water (1000 kg/m*3*). So the power
per unit area generated by a tide-pool is

2*ρhgh*

,

6 hours

assuming perfectly efficient generators. Plugging in *h* = 2 m (i.e.,
range 4 m), we find the power per unit area of tide-pool is 3.6 W/m*2*.
Allowing for an efficiency of 90% for conversion of this power to
electricity, we get

power per unit area of tide-pool  ≅  3 W/m*2*.

So to generate 1 GW of power (on average), we need a tide-pool with an
area of about 300 km*2*. A circular pool with diameter 20 km would do
the trick. (For comparison, the area of the Severn estuary behind the
proposed barrage is about 550 km*2*, and the area of the Wash is more
than 400 km*2*.

If a tide-pool produces electricity in one direction only, the power per
unit area is halved. The average power density of the tidal barrage at
La Rance, where the mean tidal range is 10.9 m, has been 2.7 W/m*2* for
decades (p87).

The raw tidal resource
----------------------

The tides around Britain are genuine tidal waves. (Tsunamis, which are
called “tidal waves,” have nothing to do with tides: they are caused by
underwater landslides and earthquakes.) The location of the high tide
(the crest of the tidal wave) moves much faster than the tidal flow –
100 miles per hour, say, while the water itself moves at just 1 mile per
hour.

The energy we can extract from tides, using tidal pools or tide farms,
can never be more than the energy of these tidal waves from the
Atlantic. We can estimate the total power of these great Atlantic tidal
waves in the same way that we estimate the power of ordinary
wind-generated waves. The next section describes a standard model for
the power arriving in

![](figure299.png)

Figure G.1. A tide-pool in cross section. The pool was filled at high
tide, and now it’s low tide. We let the water out through the
electricity generator to turn the water’s potential energy into
electricity.

![](figure300.png)

travelling waves in water of depth *d* that is shallow compared to the
wave- length of the waves (figure G.2). The power per unit length of
wavecrest of shallow-water tidal waves is

*ρg*^3/2^√*d**h*^2^/2.

(G.1)

Table G.3 shows the power per unit length of wave crest for some
plausible figures. If *d* = 100 m, and *h* = 1 or 2 m, the power per
unit length of wave crest is 150 kW/m or 600 kW/m respectively. These
figures are impressive compared with the raw power per unit length of
ordinary Atlantic deep- water waves, 40 kW/m (Chapter F). Atlantic waves
and the Atlantic tide have similar vertical amplitudes (about 1 m), but
the raw power in tides is roughly 10 times bigger than that of ordinary
wind-driven waves.

Taylor (1920) worked out a more detailed model of tidal power that
includes important details such as the Coriolis effect (the effect
produced by the earth’s daily rotation), the existence of tidal waves
travelling in the opposite direction, and the direct effect of the moon
on the energy flow in the Irish Sea. Since then, experimental
measurements and computer models have verified and extended Taylor’s
analysis. Flather (1976) built a detailed numerical model of the lunar
tide, chopping the continental shelf around the British Isles into
roughly 1000 square cells. Flather estimated that the total average
power entering this region is 215 GW. According to his model, 180 GW
enters the gap between France and Ireland. From Northern Ireland round
to Shetland, the incoming power is 49 GW. Be- tween Shetland and Norway
there is a net loss of 5 GW. As shown in figure G.4, Cartwright et al.
(1980) found experimentally that the average power transmission was 60
GW between Malin Head (Ireland) and Florø (Norway) and 190 GW between
Valentia (Ireland) and the Brittany coast near Ouessant. The power
entering the Irish Sea was found to be 45 GW, and entering the North Sea
via the Dover Straits, 16.7 GW.

### The power of tidal waves

This section, which can safely be skipped, provides more details behind
the formula for tidal power used in the previous section. I’m going to

Figure G.2. A shallow-water wave. Just like a deep-water wave, the wave
has energy in two forms: potential energy associated with raising water
out of the light-shaded troughs into the heavy-shaded crests; and
kinetic energy of all the water moving around as indicated by the small
arrows. The speed of the wave, travelling from left to right, is
indicated by the much bigger arrow at the top. For tidal waves, a
typical depth might be 100 m, the crest velocity 30 m/s, the vertical
amplitude at the surface 1 or 2 m, and the water velocity amplitude 0.3
or 0.6 m/s.

  *h* (m)   *ρg*^3/2^√*d**h*^2^/2 (kW/m)
  --------- ------------------------------
  0.9       125
  1.0       155
  1.2       220
  1.5       345
  1.75      470
  2.0       600
  2.25      780

Table G.3. Power fluxes (power per unit length of wave crest) for depth
d = 100 m.

![](figure302.png)

the power of the wave will remain constant. This means √*d**h*^2^ is a
constant, so we deduce that the height of the tide scales with depth as
*h* ≅ 1/*d*^1/4^.

This is a crude model. One neglected detail is the Coriolis effect. The
Coriolis force causes tidal crests and troughs to tend to drive on the
right – for example, going up the English Channel, the high tides are
higher and the low tides are lower on the French side of the channel. By
neglecting this effect I may have introduced some error into the
estimates.

Power density of tidal stream farms
-----------------------------------

Imagine sticking underwater windmills on the sea-bed. The flow of water
will turn the windmills. Because the density of water is roughly 1000
times that of air, the power of water flow is 1000 times greater than
the power of wind at the same speed.

What power could tidal stream farms extract? It depends crucially on
whether or not we can add up the power contributions of tidefarms on
*adjacent* pieces of sea-floor. For wind, this additivity assumption is
believed to work fine: as long as the wind turbines are spaced a
standard distance apart from each other, the total power delivered by 10
adjacent wind farms is the sum of the powers that each would deliver if
it were alone.

Does the same go for tide farms? Or do underwater windmills interfere
with each other’s power extraction in a different way? I don’t think the
answer to this question is known in general. We can name two alternative
assumptions, however, and identify cartoon situations in which each
assumption seems valid. The “tide is like wind” assumption says that you
can put tide-turbines all over the sea-bed, spaced about 5 diameters
apart from each other, and they won’t interfere with each other, no
matter how much of the sea-bed you cover with such tide farms.

The “you can have only one row” assumption, in contrast, asserts that
the maximum power extractable in a region is the power that would be
delivered by a *single* row of turbines facing the flow. A situation
where this assumption is correct is the special case of a hydroelectric
dam: if the water from the dam passes through a single well-designed
turbine, there’s no point putting any more turbines behind that one. You
can’t get 100

Figure G.5. (a) Tidal current over a 21-day period at a location where
the maximum current at spring tide is 2.9 knots (1.5 m/s) and the
maximum current at neap tide is 1.8 knots (0.9 m/s). (b) The power per
unit sea-floor area over a nine-day period extending from spring tides
to neap tides. The power peaks four times per day, and has a maximum of
about 27 W/m^2^. The average power of the tide farm is 6.4 W/m^2^.

times more power by putting 99 more turbines downstream from the first.
The oomph gets extracted by the first one, and there isn’t any more
oomph left for the others. The “you can have only one row” assumption is
the right assumption for estimating the extractable power in a place
where water flows through a narrow channel from approximately stationary
water at one height into another body of water at a lower height. (This
case is analysed by Garrett and Cummins (2005, 2007).)

I’m now going to nail my colours to a mast. I think that in many places
round the British Isles, the “tide is like wind” assumption is a good
approximation. Perhaps some spots have some of the character of a narrow
channel. In those spots, my estimates may be over-estimates.

Let’s assume that the rules for laying out a sensible tide farm will be
similar to those for wind farms, and that the efficiency of the
tidemills will be like that of the best windmills, about 1/2. We can
then steal the formula for the power of a wind farm (per unit land area)
from p265. The power per unit sea-floor area is

power per tidemill

 = 

*π*

1

*ρU*^3^

   [^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#316)

area per tidemill

200

2

Using this formula, table G.6 shows this tide farm power for a few tidal
currents.

Now, what are typical tidal currents? Tidal charts usually give the
currents associated with the tides with the largest range (called spring
tides) and the tides with the smallest range (called neap tides). Spring
tides occur shortly after each full moon and each new moon. Neap tides
occur shortly after the first and third quarters of the moon. The power
of a tide farm would vary throughout the day in a completely predictable
manner. Figure G.5 illustrates the variation of power density of a tide
farm with a maximum current of 1.5 m/s. The average power density of
this tide farm would be 6.4 W/m^2^. There are many places around the
British Isles where the power per unit area of tide farm would be 6
W/m^2^ or more. This power density is similar to our estimates of the
power densities of wind farms (2–3 W/m^2^) and of photovoltaic solar
farms (5–10 W/m^2^).

We’ll now use this “tide farms are like wind farms” theory to estimate
the extractable power from tidal streams in promising regions around the
British Isles. As a sanity check, we’ll also work out the total tidal
power crossing each of these regions, using the “power of tidal waves”
theory, to check our tide farm’s estimated power isn’t bigger than the
total power available. The main locations around the British Isles where
tidal currents are large are shown in figure G.7.

I estimated the typical peak currents at six locations with large
currents by looking at tidal charts in *Reed’s Nautical Almanac*. (These
estimates could easily be off by 30%.) Have I over-estimated or
under-estimated the area of each region? I haven’t surveyed the sea
floor so I don’t know if some regions might be unsuitable in some way –
too deep, or too shallow, or too

*U*

tide farm

(m/s)

(knots)

power

 

 

(W/m^2^)

0.5

1

1

1

2

8

2

4

60

3

6

200

4

8

500

5

10

1000

Table G.6. Tide farm power density (in watts per square metre of
sea-floor) as a function of flow speed *U*. (1 knot = 1 nautical mile
per hour = 0.514 m/s.) The power density is computed using
(*π*/200)^1^⁄~2~*ρU*^3^ (equation (G.10)).

  tidal amplitude (half-range) *h* (m)   boost height *b* (m)   power with pumping (W/m^2^)   power without pumping (W/m^2^)
  -------------------------------------- ---------------------- ----------------------------- --------------------------------
  1.0                                    1.0                    1.6                           0.8
  2.0                                    2.0                    6.3                           3.3
  3.0                                    3.0                    14                            7.4
  4.0                                    4.0                    25                            13

level at high tide can be pumped up to the maximum. Table G.11 gives the
power delivered if the boost height is set to *h*, that is, the range in
the pool is just double the external range. A doubling of vertical range
is easy at neap tides, since neap tides are typically about half as high
as spring tides. Pumping the pool at neaps so that the full springs
range is used thus allows neap tides to deliver roughly twice as much
power as they would offer without pumping. So a system with pumping
would show two-weekly variations in power of just a factor of 2 instead
of 4.

### Getting “always-on” tidal power by using two basins

Here’s a neat idea: have two basins, one of which is the “full” basin
and one the “empty” basin; every high tide, the full basin is topped up;
every low tide, the empty basin is emptied. These toppings-up and
emptyings could be done either passively through sluices, or actively by
pumps (using the trick mentioned above). Whenever power is required,
water is allowed to flow from the full basin to the empty basin, or
(better in power terms) between one of the basins and the sea. The
capital cost of a two-basin scheme may be bigger because of the need for
extra walls; the big win is that power is available all the time, so the
facility can follow demand.

We can use power generated from the empty basin to pump extra water into
the full basin at high tide, and similarly use power from the full basin
to pump down the empty basin at low tide. This self-pumping would boost
the total power delivered by the facility without ever needing to buy
energy from the grid. It’s a delightful feature of a two-pool solution
that the optimal time to *pump* water into the high pool is high tide,
which is also the optimal time to *generate* power from the low pool.
Similarly, low tide is the perfect time to pump down the low pool, and
it’s the perfect time to generate power from the high pool. In a simple
simulation, I’ve found that a two-lagoon system in a location with a
natural tidal range of 4 m can, with an appropriate pumping schedule,
deliver a *steady* power of 4.5 W/m^2^ (MacKay, 2007a). One lagoon’s
water level is always kept above mean sea-level; the other lagoon’s
level is always kept below mean sealevel. This power density of 4.5
W/m^2^ is 50% bigger than the maximum possible average power density of
an ordinary tide-pool in the same lo-

Table G.11. Power density offered by the pumping trick, assuming the
boost height is constrained to be the same as the tidal amplitude. This
assumption applies, for example, at neap tides, if the pumping pushes
the tidal range up to the springs range.

![](figure304.png)

cation (3 W/m^2^). The steady power of the lagoon system would be more
valuable than the intermittent and less-flexible power from the ordinary
tide-pool.

A two-basin system could also function as a pumped-storage facility.

Notes
-----

page no.

311*Efficiency of 90%...* Turbines are about 90% efficient for heads of
3.7 m or more. Baker et al. (2006).

320*Getting “always-on” tidal power by using two basins.* There is a
two-basin tidal power plant at Haishan, Maoyan Island, China. A single
generator located between the two basins, as shown in figure G.12(a),
delivers power continuously, and generates 39 kW on average. [2bqapk].

Further reading: Shaw and Watson (2003b); Blunden and Bahaj (2007);
Charlier (2003a,b). For further reading on bottom friction and variation
of flow with depth, see Sleath (1984). For more on the estimation of the
UK tidal resource, see MacKay (2007b). For more on tidal lagoons, see
MacKay (2007a).

Figure G.12. Different ways to use the tidal pumping trick. Two lagoons
are located at sea-level. (a) One simple way of using two lagoons is to
label one the high pool and the other the low pool; when the surrounding
sea level is near to high tide, let water into the high pool, or
actively pump it in (using electricity from other sources); and
similarly, when the sea level is near to low tide, empty the low pool,
either passively or by active pumping; then whenever power is
sufficiently valuable, generate power on demand by letting water from
the high pool to the low pool. (b) Another arrangement that might
deliver more power per unit area has no flow of water between the two
lagoons. While one lagoon is being pumped full or pumped empty, the
other lagoon can deliver steady, demand-following power to the grid.
Pumping may be powered by bursty sources such as wind, by spare power
from the grid (say, nuclear power stations), or by the other half of the
facility, using one lagoon’s power to pump the other lagoon up or down.

H   Stuff II {.red}
============

Imported energy
---------------

Dieter Helm and his colleagues estimated the footprint of each pound’s
worth of imports from country X using the average carbon intensity of
country X’s economy (that is, the ratio of their carbon emissions to
their gross domestic product). They concluded that the embodied carbon
in im- ports to Britain (which should arguably be added to Britain’s
official car- bon footprint of 11 tons CO~2~e per year per person) is
roughly 16 tons CO~2~e per year per person. A subsequent, more detailed
study commissioned by DEFRA estimated that the embodied carbon in
imports is smaller, but still very significant: about 6.2 tons CO~2~e
per year per person. In energy terms, 6 tons CO~2~e per year is
something like 60 kWh/d.

Here, let’s see if we can reproduce these conclusions in a different
way, using the weights of the imports.

Figure H.2 shows Britain’s imports in the year 2006 in three ways: on
the left, the total *value* of the imports is broken down by the country
of origin. In the middle, the same total financial value is broken down
by the type of stuff imported, using the categories of HM Revenue and
Customs. On the right, all maritime imports to Britain are shown by
*weight* and bro- ken down by the categories used by the Department for
Transport, which doesn’t care whether something is leather or tobacco –
it keeps track of how heavy stuff is, whether it is dry or liquid, and
whether the stuff arrived in a container or a lorry.

The energy cost of the imported fuels (top right) *is* included in the
standard accounts of British energy consumption; the energy costs of all
the other imports are not. For most materials, the embodied energy per
unit weight is greater than or equal to 10 kWh per kg – the same as the
energy per unit weight of fossil fuels. This is true of all metals and
alloys, all polymers and composites, most paper products, and many
ceramics, for example. The exceptions are raw materials like ores;
porous ceramics such as concrete, brick, and porcelain, whose energy
cost is 10 times lower; wood and some rubbers; and glasses, whose energy
cost is a whisker lower than 10 kWh per kg. [r22oz]

We can thus roughly estimate the energy footprint of our imports sim-
ply from the weight of their manufactured materials, if we exclude
things like ores and wood. Given the crudity of the data with which we
are work- ing, we will surely slip up and inadvertently include some
things made of wood and glass, but hopefully such slips will be balanced
by our underes- timation of the energy content of most of the metals and
plastics and more complex goods, many of which have an embodied energy
of not 10 but 30 kWh per kg, or even more.

For this calculation I’ll take from the right-hand column in figure H.2

![](figure306.png)

Figure H.1. Continuous casting of steel strands at Korea Iron and Steel
Company.

![](figure305.png)

Figure H.2. Imports of stuff to the UK,2006.

the iron and steel products, the dry bulk products, the containerized
freight and the “other freight,” which total 98million tons per year.
I’m leaving the vehicles to one side for a moment. I subtract from this
an estimated 25million tons of food which is presumably lurking in the
“other freight” category (34 million tons of food were imported in
2006), leaving 73 million tons.

Converting 73 million tons to energy using the exchange rate suggested
above, and sharing between 60 million people, we estimate that those im-
ports have an embodied energy of 33 kWh/d per person.

For the cars, we can hand-wave a little less, because we know a little
more: the number of imported vehicles in 2006 was 2.4 million. If we
take the embodied energy per car to be 76 000 kWh (a number we picked up
on p90) then these imported cars have an embodied energy of 8 kWh/d per
person.

I left the “liquid bulk products” out of these estimates because I am
not sure what sort of products they are. If they are actually liquid
chemicals then their contribution might be significant.

We’ve arrived at a total estimate of 41 kWh/d per person for the em-
bodied energy of imports – definitely in the same ballpark as the
estimate of Dieter Helm and his colleagues.

I suspect that 41 kWh/d per person may be an underestimate because the
energy intensity we assumed (10
kWh/d[^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#324) per person)
is too low for most forms of manufactured goods such as machinery or
electrical equip- ment. However, without knowing the weights of all the
import categories, this is the best estimate I can make for now.

Lifecycle analysis for buildings
--------------------------------

Tables H.4 and H.5 show estimates of the *Process Energy Requirement* of
building materials and building constructions. This includes the energy
used in transporting the raw materials to the factory but not energy
used to transport the final product to the building site.

Table H.6 uses these numbers to estimate the process energy formaking a
three-bedroom house. The *gross energy requirement* widens the bound-
ary, including the embodied energy of urban infrastructure, for example,
the embodied energy of the machinery that makes the raw materials. A
rough rule of thumb to get the gross energy requirement of a building is
to double the process energy requirement [3kmcks].

If we share 42 000 kWh over 100 years, and double it to estimate the
gross energy cost, the total embodied energy of a house comes to about
2.3 kWh/d. This is the energy cost of the *shell* of the house only –
the bricks, tiles, roof beams.

![](figure307.png)

Figure H.3. Niobium open cast mine, Brazil.

Material

Embodied energy

 

(MJ/kg)

(kWh/kg)

kiln-dried sawn softwood

3.4

0.94

kiln-dried sawn hardwood

2.0

0.56

air dried sawn hardwood

0.5

0.14

hardboard

24.2

6.7

particleboard

8.0

2.2

MDF

11.3

3.1

plywood

10.4

2.9

glue-laminated timber

11

3.0

laminated veneer lumber

11

3.0

straw

0.24

0.07

stabilised earth

0.7

0.19

imported dimension granite

13.9

3.9

local dimension granite

5.9

1.6

gypsum plaster

2.9

0.8

plasterboard

4.4

1.2

fibre cement

4.8

1.3

cement

5.6

1.6

in situ concrete

1.9

0.53

precast steam-cured concrete

2.0

0.56

precast tilt-up concrete

1.9

0.53

clay bricks

2.5

0.69

concrete blocks

1.5

0.42

autoclaved aerated concrete

3.6

1.0

plastics – general

90

25

PVC

80

22

synthetic rubber

110

30

acrylic paint

61.5

17

glass

12.7

3.5

fibreglass (glasswool)

28

7.8

aluminium

170

47

copper

100

28

galvanised steel

38

10.6

stainless steel

51.5

14.3

Table H.4. Embodied energy of building materials (assuming virgin rather
than recycled product is used). (Dimension stone is natural stone or
rock that has been selected and trimmed to specific sizes or shapes.)
Sources: [3kmcks], Lawson (1996).

![](figure506.png)

Embodied energy (kWh/m^2^)

Walls

   timber frame, timber weatherboard, plasterboard lining

52

   timber frame, clay brick veneer, plasterboard lining

156

   timber frame, aluminium weatherboard, plasterboard lining

112

   steel frame, clay brick veneer, plasterboard lining

168

   double clay brick, plasterboard lined

252

   cement stabilised rammed earth

104

Floors

   elevated timber floor

81

   110 mm concrete slab on ground

179

   200 mm precast concrete T beam/infill

179

Roofs

   timber frame, concrete tile, plasterboard ceiling

70

   timber frame, terracotta tile, plasterboard ceiling

75

   timber frame, steel sheet, plasterboard ceiling

92

Area (m^2^)

×

energy density (kWh/m^2^)

energy (kWh)

Floors

100

×

81

=

8100

Roof

75

×

75

=

5600

External walls

75

×

252

=

19 000

Internal walls

75

×

125

=

9400

Total

42 000

Notes and further reading
-------------------------

page no.

322*A subsequent more-detailed study commissioned by DEFRA estimated
that the embodied carbon in imports is about 6.2 tons CO~2~e per
person.* Wied- mann et al. (2008).

Further resources: www.greenbooklive.com has life cycle assessments of
building products. Some helpful cautions about life-cycle analysis:
www.gdrc.org/uem/lca/ life-cycle.html. More links:
www.epa.gov/ord/NRMRL/lcaccess/resources.htm.

Table H.5. Embodied energy in various walls, floors, and roofs. Sources:
[3kmcks], Lawson (1996).

Table H.6. Process energy for making a three-bedroom house.

![](figure308.png)

Figure H.7. Millau Viaduct in France, the highest bridge in the world.
Steel and concrete, 2.5 km long and 353 m high.

I   Quick reference {.darkblue}
===================

SI Units
--------

**The watt**. This SI unit is named after James Watt. As for all SI
units whose names are derived from the proper name of a person, the
first letter of its symbol is uppercase (W). But when an SI unit is
spelled out, it should always be written in lowercase (watt), with the
exception of the “degree Celsius.”

from wikipedia

SI stands for Système Internationale. SI units are the ones that all
engineers should use, to avoid losing spacecraft.

SI units

energy

onejoule

1 J

power

one watt

1 W

force

one newton

1 N

length

one metre

1 m

time

one second

1 s

temperature

one kelvin

1 K

prefix

kilo

mega

giga

tera

peta

exa

symbol

k

M

G

T

P

E

factor

10^3^

10^6^

10^9^

10^12^

10^15^

10^18^

 

prefix

centi

milli

micro

nano

pico

femto

symbol

c

m

*μ*

n

p

f

factor

10^-2^

10^-3^

10^-6^

10^-9^

10^-12^

10^-15^

My preferred units for energy, power, and transport efficiencies {style="margin-top:6em"}
----------------------------------------------------------------

My preferred units, expressed in SI

 

energy

one kilowatt-hour

1 kWh

3 600 000 J

power

one kilowatt-hour per day

1 kWh/d

(1000/24) W  ≅  40 W

force

one kilowatt-hour per 100 km

1 kWh/100 km

36 N

time

one hour

1 h

3600 s

 

one day

1 d

24 × 3600 s  ≅  10^5^ s

 

one year

1 y

365.25 × 24 × 3600 s  ≅  *π* × 10^7^ s

force per mass

kilowatt-hour per ton-kilometre

1 kWh/t-km

3.6 m/s^2^ (≅  0.37 *g*)

Table 1.1. SI units and prefixes

  Thing measured   unit name                 symbol         value
  ---------------- ------------------------- -------------- -------------------------------
  humans           person                    p              
  mass             ton                       t              1 t = 1000 kg
                   gigaton                   Gt             1 Gt = 10^9^ × 1000 kg = 1 Pg
  transport        person-kilometre          p-km           
  transport        ton-kilometre             t-km           
  volume           litre                     l              1 l = 0.001 m^3^
  area             square kilometre          sq km, km^2^   1 sq km = 10^6^ m^2^
                   hectare                   ha             1 ha = 10^4^ m^2^
                   Wales                                    1 Wales = 21 000 km^2^
                   London (Greater London)                  1 London = 1580 km^2^
  energy           Dinorwig                                 1 Dinorwig = 9 GWh

Billions, millions, and other people’s prefixes
-----------------------------------------------

Throughout this book “a billion” (1 bn) means a standard American
billion, that is, 10^9^, or a thousand million. A trillion is 10^12^.
The standard prefix meaning “billion” (10^9^) is “giga.”

In continental Europe, the abbreviations Mio and Mrd denote a million
and billion respectively. Mrd is short for milliard, which means 10^9^.

The abbreviation m is often used to mean million, but this abbreviation
is incompatible with the SI – think of mg (milligram) for example. So I
don’t use m to mean million. Where some people use m, I replace it by M.
For example, I use Mtoe for million tons of oil equivalent, and MtCO~2~
for million tons of CO~2~.

Annoying units
--------------

There’s a whole bunch of commonly used units that are annoying for
various reasons. I’ve figured out what some of them mean. I list them
here, to help you translate the media stories you read.

#### Homes

The “home” is commonly used when describing the power of renewable
facilities. For example, “The £300 million Whitelee wind farm’s 140
turbines will generate 322 MW – enough to power 200 000 homes.” The
“home” is defined by the BritishWind Energy Association to be a power of
4700 kWh per year [www.bwea.com/ukwed/operational.asp]. That’s 0.54 kW,
or 13 kWh per day. (A few other organizations use 4000 kWh/y per
household.)

The “home” annoys me because I worry that people confuse it with *the
total power consumption of the occupants of a home* – but the latter is
actually

about 24 times bigger. The “home” covers the average domestic
*electricity* consumption of a household, only. Not the household’s home
heating. Nor their workplace. Nor their transport. Nor all the
energy-consuming things that society does for them.

Incidentally, when they talk of the CO~2~ emissions of a “home,” the
official exchange rate appears to be 4 tons CO~2~ per home per year.

#### Power stations

Energy saving ideas are sometimes described in terms of power stations.
For example according to a BBC report on putting new everlasting LED
lightbulbs in traffic lights, “The power savings would be huge – keeping
the UK’s traffic lights running requires the equivalent of two medium-
sized power stations.” news.bbc.co.uk/1/low/sci/tech/specials/
sheffield\_99/449368.stm

What is a medium-sized power station? 10 MW? 50 MW? 100 MW? 500 MW? I
don’t have a clue. A google search indicates that some people think it’s
30 MW, some 250 MW, some 500 MW (the most common choice), and some 800
MW. What a useless unit!

Surely it would be clearer for the article about traffic lights to
express what it’s saying as a percentage? “Keeping the UK’s traffic
lights running requires 11 MW of electricity, which is 0.03% of the UK’s
electricity.” This would reveal how “huge” the power savings are.

Figure I.2 shows the powers of the UK’s 19 coal power stations.

#### Cars taken off the road

Some advertisements describe reductions in CO~2~ pollution in terms of
the “equivalent number of cars taken off the road.” For example, Richard
Branson says that if Virgin Trains’ Voyager fleet switched to 20%
biodiesel – incidentally, don’t you feel it’s outrageous to call a train
a “green biodiesel- powered train” when it runs on 80% fossil fuels and
just 20% biodiesel? – sorry, I got distracted. Richard Branson says that
*if* Virgin Trains’ Voyager fleet switched to 20% biodiesel – I
emphasize the “if” because people like Beardie are always getting media
publicity for announcing that they are *thinking* of doing good things,
but some of these fanfared initiatives are later quietly cancelled, such
as the idea of towing aircraft around airports to make them greener –
sorry, I got distracted again. Richard Branson says that *if* Virgin
Trains’ Voyager fleet switched to 20% biodiesel, then there would be a
reduction of 34 500 tons of CO~2~ per year, which is equivalent to “23
000 cars taken off the road.” This statement reveals the exchange rate:

“one car taken off the road” ↔ - 1.5 tons per year of CO~2~.

#### Calories

The calorie is annoying because the diet community call a kilocalorie a
Calorie. 1 such food Calorie = 1000 calories.

2500 kcal = 3 kWh = 10 000 kJ = 10 MJ.

![](figure309-0-0.png)

Figure I.2. Powers of Britain’s coal power stations. I’ve highlighted in
blue 8 GW of generating capacity that will close by 2015. 2500 MW,
shared across Britain, is the same as 1 kWh per day per person.

#### Barrels

An annoying unit loved by the oil community, along with the ton of oil.
Why can’t they stick to one unit? A barrel of oil is 6.1 GJ or 1700 kWh.

Barrels are doubly annoying because there are multiple definitions of
barrels, all having different volumes.

Here’s everything you need to know about barrels of oil. One barrel is
42 U.S. gallons, or 159 litres. One barrel of oil is 0.1364 tons of oil.
One barrel of crude oil has an energy of 5.75 GJ. One barrel of oil
weighs 136 kg. One ton of crude oil is 7.33 barrels and 42.1 GJ. The
carbon-pollution rate of crude oil is 400 kg of CO~2~ per barrel.
www.chemlink.com.au/convers- ions.htm. This means that when the price of
oil is \$100 per barrel, oil energy costs 6¢ per kWh. If there were a
carbon tax of \$250 per ton of CO~2~ on fossil fuels, that tax would
increase the price of a barrel of oil by \$100.

#### Gallons

The gallon would be a fine human-friendly unit, except the Yanks messed
it up by defining the gallon differently from everyone else, as they did
the pint and the quart. The US volumes are all roughly five-sixths of
the correct volumes.

1 US gal = 3.785 l = 0.83 imperial gal. 1 imperial gal = 4.545 l.

#### Tons

Tons are annoying because there are short tons, long tons and metric
tons. They are close enough that I don’t bother distinguishing between
them. 1 short ton (2000 lb) = 907 kg; 1 long ton (2240 lb) = 1016 kg; 1
metric ton (or tonne) = 1000 kg.

#### BTU and quads

British thermal units are annoying because they are neither part of the
*Système Internationale*, nor are they of a useful size. Like the
useless joule, they are too small, so you have to roll out silly
prefixes like “quadrillion” (10^15^) to make practical use of them.

1 kJ is 0.947 BTU. 1 kWh is 3409 BTU.

A “quad” is 1 quadrillion BTU = 293 TWh.

Funny units
-----------

#### Cups of tea

Is this a way to make solar panels sound good? “Once all the 7 000 pho-
tovoltaic panels are in place, it is expected that the solar panels will
create 180 000 units of renewable electricity each year – enough energy
to make nine million cups of tea.” This announcement thus equates 1 kWh
to 50 cups of tea.

As a unit of volume, 1 US cup (half a US pint) is officially 0.24 l; but
a cup of tea or coffee is usually about 0.18 l. To raise 50 cups of
water, at 0.18 l per cup, from 15 °C to 100 °C requires 1 kWh.

So “nine million cups of tea per year” is another way of saying “20 kW.”

#### Double-decker buses, Albert Halls and Wembley stadiums

“If everyone in the UK that could, installed cavity wall insulation, we
could cut carbon dioxide emissions by a huge 7 million tons. That’s
enough carbon dioxide to fill nearly 40 million double-decker buses or
fill the new Wembley stadium 900 times!”

From which we learn the helpful fact that one Wembley is 44 000 double
decker buses. Actually, Wembley’s bowl has a volume of 1 140 000 m^3^.

“If every household installed just one energy saving light bulb, there
would be enough carbon dioxide saved to fill the Royal Albert Hall 1,980
times!” (An Albert Hall is 100 000 m^3^.)

Expressing amounts of CO~2~ by volume rather than mass is a great way to
make them sound big. Should “1 kg of CO~2~ per day” sound too small,
just say “200 000 litres of CO~2~ per year”!

More volumes
------------

A container is 2.4 m wide by 2.6 m high by (6.1 or 12.2) metres long
(for the TEU and FEU respectively).

One TEU is the size of a small 20-foot container – an interior volume of
about 33 m^3^. Most containers you see today are 40-foot containers with
a size of 2 TEU. A 40-foot container weighs 4 tons and can carry 26 tons
of stuff; its volume is 67.5 m^3^.

A swimming pool has a volume of about 3000 m^3^.

One double decker bus has a volume of 100 m^3^.

One hot air balloon is 2500 m^3^.

The great pyramid at Giza has a volume of 2 500 000 cubic metres.

Areas
-----

The area of the earth’s surface is 500 × 10^6^ km^2^; the land area is
150 × 10^6^ km^2^.

My typical British 3-bedroom house has a floor area of 88 m^2^. In the
USA, the average size of a single-family house is 2330 square feet (216
m^2^).

Powers
------

If we add the suffix “e” to a power, this means that we’re explicitly
talking about electrical power. So, for example, a power station’s
output might be 1 GW(e), while it uses chemical power at a rate of 2.5
GW. Similarly the

  mass of CO~2~   ↔   volume
  --------------- --- ------------
  2 kg CO~2~      ↔   1 m^3^
  1 kg CO~2~      ↔   500 litres
  44 g CO~2~      ↔   2 litres
  2 g CO~2~       ↔   1 litre

Table I.3. Volume-to-mass conversion.

![](figure310.png)

Figure I.4. A twenty-foot container (1 TEU).

  ------------- --- ------------
  hectare       =   10^4^ m^2^
  acre          =   4050 m^2^
  square mile   =   2.6 km^2^
  square foot   =   0.093 m^2^
  square yard   =   0.84 m^2^
  ------------- --- ------------

Table I.5. Areas.

  Land use               area per person (m^2^)   percentage
  ---------------------- ------------------------ ------------
  – domestic buildings   30                       1.1
  – domestic gardens     114                      4.3
  – other buildings      18                       0.66
  – roads                60                       2.2
  – railways             3.6                      0.13
  – paths                2.9                      0.11
  – greenspace           2335                     87.5
  – water                69                       2.6
  – other land uses      37                       1.4
  Total                  2670                     100

  -------------------------------------- --- --------- --- ----------
  1000 BTU per hour                      =   0.3 kW    =   7 kWh/d
  1 horse power (1 hp or 1 cv or 1 ps)   =   0.75 kW   =   18 kWh/d
                                             1 kW      =   24 kWh/d
  -------------------------------------- --- --------- --- ----------

  ------------------------------- --- --------------------
  1 therm                         =   29.31 kWh
  1000 Btu                        =   0.2931 kWh
  1 MJ                            =   0.2778 kWh
  1 GJ                            =   277.8 kWh
  1 toe (ton of oil equivalent)   =   11 630 kWh
  1 kcal                          =   1.163 × 10^-3^ kWh
  ------------------------------- --- --------------------

  ------- --- --------- ------ ----- ------------- -------
  1 kWh   =   0.03412   3412   3.6   86 × 10^-6^   859.7
              therms    Btu    MJ    toe           kcal
  ------- --- --------- ------ ----- ------------- -------

suffix “th” may be added to indicate that a quantity of energy is
thermal energy. The same suffixes can be added to amounts of energy. “My
house uses 2 kWh(e) of electricity per day.”

If we add a suffix “p” to a power, this indicates that it’s a “peak”
power, or capacity. For example, 10 m^2^ of panels might have a power of
1 kWp.

1 kWh/d = 1/24 kW.

1 toe/y = 1.33 kW.

Petrol comes out of a petrol pump at about half a litre per second. So
that’s 5 kWh per second, or 18 MW.

The power of a Formula One racing car is 560 kW.

UK electricity consumption is 17 kWh per day per person, or 42.5 GW per
UK.

“One ton” of air-conditioning = 3.5 kW.

Table I.6. Land areas, in England, devoted to different uses. Source:
Generalized Land Use Database Statistics for England 2005. [3b7zdf]

Box I.7. How other energy and power units relate to the kilowatt-hour
and the kilowatt-hour per day.

### World power consumption

World power consumption is 15 TW. World electricity consumption is 2 TW.

### Useful conversion factors

To change TWh per year to GW, divide by 9.

1 kWh/d per person is the same as 2.5 GW per UK, or 22 TWh/y per UK

To change mpg (miles per UK gallon) to km per litre, divide by 3.

At room temperature, 1 *kT* = ^1^⁄~40~eV

At room temperature, 1 *kT* per molecule = 2.5 kJ/mol.

### Meter reading

How to convert your gas-meter reading into kilowatt-hours:

-   If the meter reads **100s of cubic feet**, take the number of units
    used, and multiply by **32.32** to get the number of kWh.
-   If the meter reads **cubic metres**, take the number of units used,
    and multiply by **11.42** to get the number of kWh.

Calorific values of fuels
-------------------------

Crude oil: 37 MJ/l; 10.3 kWh/l. Natural gas: 38 MJ/m^3^. (Methane has a
density of 1.819 kg/m^3^.) 1 ton of coal: 29.3 GJ; 8000 kWh. Fusion
energy of ordinary water: 1800 kWh per litre. See also table 26.14,
p199, and table D.3, p284.

Heat capacities
---------------

The heat capacity of air is 1 kJ/kg/°C, or 29 J/mol/°C. The density of
air is 1.2 kg/m^3^. So the heat capacity of air per unit volume is 1.2
kJ/m^3^/°C.

Latent heat of vaporization of water: 2257.92 kJ/kg. Water vapour’s heat
capacity: 1.87 kJ/kg/°C. Water’s heat capacity is 4.2 kJ/l/°C.

Steam’s density is 0.590 kg/m^3^.

Pressure
--------

Atmospheric pressure: 1 bar ≅ 10^5^ Pa (pascal). Pressure under 1000 m
of water: 100 bar. Pressure under 3000 m of water: 300 bar.

kWh/t-km

inland water

0.083

rail

0.083

truck

0.75

air

2.8

oil pipeline

0.056

gas pipeline

0.47

int’l water container

0.056

int’l water bulk

0.056

int’l water tanker

0.028

Table I.8. Energy intensity of transport modes in the USA. Source: Weber
and Matthews (2008).

Money
-----

I assumed the following exchange rates when discussing money: €1 =
\$1.26; £1 = \$1.85 ; \$1 = \$1.12 Canadian. These exchange rates were
correct in mid-2006.

Greenhouse gas conversion factors
---------------------------------

  ---------------- -----
  France           83
  Sweden           87
  Canada           220
  Austria          250
  Belgium          335
  European Union   353
  Finland          399
  Spain            408
  Japan            483
  Portugal         525
  United Kingdom   580
  Luxembourg       590
  Germany          601
  USA              613
  Netherlands      652
  Italy            667
  Ireland          784
  Greece           864
  Denmark          881
  ---------------- -----

Figure I.9. Carbon intensity of electricity production (g CO~2~ per kWh
of electricity).

  Fuel type        emissions (g CO~2~ per kWh of chemical energy)
  ---------------- ------------------------------------------------
  natural gas      190
  refinery gas     200
  ethane           200
  LPG              210
  jet kerosene     240
  petrol           240
  gas/diesel oil   250
  heavy fuel oil   260
  naptha           260
  coking coal      300
  coal             300
  petroleum coke   340

Figure I.10. Emissions associated with fuel combustion. Source: DEFRA’s
Environmental Reporting Guidelines for Company Reporting on Greenhouse
Gas Emissions.

![](figure311.png)

Figure I.11. Greenhouse-gas emissions per capita, versus GDP per capita,
in purchasing-power-parity US dollars. Squares show countries having
“high human development;” circles, “medium” or “low.” See also figures
30.1 (p231) and 18.4 (p105). Source: UNDP Human Development Report,
2007. [3av4s9]

![](figure312.png)

Figure I.12. Greenhouse-gas emissions per capita, versus power
consumption per capita. The lines show the emission-intensities of coal
and natural gas. Squares show countries having “high human development;”
circles, “medium” or “low.” See also figures 30.1 (p231) and 18.4
(p105). Source: UNDP Human Development Report, 2007.

J   Populations and areas {.darkblue}
=========================

Population densities
--------------------

Figure J.1 shows the areas of various regions versus their populations.
Diagonal lines on this diagram are lines of constant population density.
Bangladesh, on the rightmost-but-one diagonal, has a population density
of 1000 per square kilometre; India, England, the Netherlands, and Japan
have population densities one third that: about 350 per km^2^. Many Eu-
ropean countries have about 100 per km^2^. At the other extreme, Canada,
Australia, and Libya have population densities of about 3 people per
km^2^. The central diagonal line marks the population density of the
world: 43 people per square kilometre. America is an average country
from this point of view: the 48 contiguous states of the USA have the
same pop- ulation density as the world. Regions that are notably rich in
area, and whose population density is below the average, include Russia,
Canada, Latin America, Sudan, Algeria, and Saudi Arabia.

Of these large, area-rich countries, some that are close to Britain, and
with whom Britain might therefore wish to be friendly, are Kazakhstan,
Libya, Saudi Arabia, Algeria, and Sudan.

![](figure313.png)

Figure J.1. Populations and areas ofcountries and regions of the
world.Both scales are logarithmic. Eachsloping line identifies a
populationdensity; countries with highestpopulation density are towards
thelower right, and lower populationdensities are towards the upper
left.These data are provided in tabularform on p341.

Region

Population

Area (km^2^)

People per km^2^

Area per person (m^2^)

 

Region

Population

Area (km^2^)

People per km^2^

Area per person (m^2^)

Afghanistan

29 900 000

647 000

46

21 600

 

 

Africa

**778 000 000**

**30 000 000**

26

38 600

 

Lithuania

3 590 000

65 200

55

18 100

Alaska

655 000

1 480 000

0.44

2 260 000

 

Madagascar

18 000 000

587 000

31

32 500

Albania

3 560 000

28 700

123

8 060

 

Mali

12 200 000

1 240 000

10

100 000

Algeria

32 500 000

2 380 000

14

73 200

 

Malta

398 000

316

1 260

792

Angola

11 100 000

1 240 000

9

111 000

 

Mauritania

3 080 000

1 030 000

3

333 000

Antarctica

4 000

**13 200 000**

 

 

 

Mexico

**106 000 000**

1 970 000

54

18 500

Argentina

39 500 000

2 760 000

14

69 900

 

Moldova

4 450 000

33 800

131

7 590

Asia

**3 670 000 000**

**44 500 000**

82

12 100

 

Mongolia

2 790 000

1 560 000

1.8

560 000

Australia

20 000 000

**7 680 000**

2.6

382 000

 

Mozambique

19 400 000

801 000

24

41 300

Austria

8 180 000

83 800

98

10 200

 

Myanmar

42 900 000

678 000

63

15 800

Bangladesh

**144 000 000**

144 000

1 000

997

 

Namibia

2 030 000

825 000

2.5

406 000

Belarus

10 300 000

207 000

50

20 100

 

Netherlands

16 400 000

41 500

395

2 530

Belgium

10 000 000

31 000

340

2 945

 

New Zealand

4 030 000

268 000

15

66 500

Bolivia

8 850 000

1 090 000

8

124 000

 

Niger

11 600 000

1 260 000

9

108 000

Bosnia & Herzegovina

4 020 000

51 100

79

12 700

 

Nigeria

**128 000 000**

923 000

139

7 170

Botswana

1 640 000

600 000

2.7

366 000

 

North America

**483 000 000**

**24 200 000**

20

50 200

Brazil

**186 000 000**

**8 510 000**

22

45 700

 

Norway

4 593 000

324 000

14

71 000

Bulgaria

7 450 000

110 000

67

14 800

 

Oceania

31 000 000

**7 680 000**

4

247 000

CAR

3 790 000

622 000

6

163 000

 

Pakistan

**162 000 000**

803 000

202

4 940

Canada

32 800 000

**9 980 000**

3.3

304 000

 

Peru

27 900 000

1 280 000

22

46 000

Chad

9 820 000

1 280 000

8

130 000

 

Philippines

**87 800 000**

300 000

292

3 410

Chile

16 100 000

756 000

21

46 900

 

Poland

39 000 000

313 000

124

8 000

China

**1 300 000 000**

**9 590 000**

136

7 340

 

Portugal

10 500 000

92 300

114

8 740

Colombia

42 900 000

1 130 000

38

26 500

 

Republic of Macedonia

2 040 000

25 300

81

12 300

Croatia

4 490 000

56 500

80

12 500

 

Romania

22 300 000

237 000

94

10 600

Czech Republic

10 200 000

78 800

129

7 700

 

Russia

**143 000 000**

**17 000 000**

8

119 000

DRC

**60 000 000**

2 340 000

26

39 000

 

Saudi Arabia

26 400 000

1 960 000

13

74 200

Denmark

5 430 000

43 000

126

7 930

 

Scotland

5 050 000

78 700

64

15 500

Egypt

**77 500 000**

1 000 000

77

12 900

 

Serbia & Montenegro

10 800 000

102 000

105

9 450

England

49 600 000

130 000

380

2 630

 

Singapore

4 420 000

693

6 380

156

Estonia

1 330 000

45 200

29

33 900

 

Slovakia

5 430 000

48 800

111

8 990

Ethiopia

**73 000 000**

1 120 000

65

15 400

 

Slovenia

2 010 000

20 200

99

10 000

Europe

**732 000 000**

**9 930 000**

74

13 500

 

Somalia

8 590 000

637 000

13

74 200

European Union

**496 000 000**

4 330 000

115

8 720

 

South Africa

44 300 000

1 210 000

36

27 500

Finland

5 220 000

338 000

15

64 700

 

South Korea

48 400 000

98 400

491

2 030

France

**60 600 000**

547 000

110

9 010

 

Spain

40 300 000

504 000

80

12 500

Gaza Strip

1 370 000

360

3 820

261

 

Sudan

40 100 000

2 500 000

16

62 300

Germany

**82 400 000**

357 000

230

4 330

 

Suriname

438 000

163 000

2.7

372 000

Greece

10 600 000

131 000

81

12 300

 

Sweden

9 000 000

449 000

20

49 900

Greenland

56 300

2 160 000

0.026

38 400 000

 

Switzerland

7 480 000

41 200

181

5 510

Hong Kong

6 890 000

1 090

6 310

158

 

Taiwan

22 800 000

35 900

636

1 570

Hungary

10 000 000

93 000

107

9 290

 

Tanzania

36 700 000

945 000

39

25 700

Iceland

296 000

103 000

2.9

347 000

 

Thailand

**65 400 000**

514 000

127

7 850

India

**1 080 000 000**

3 280 000

328

3 040

 

Turkey

**69 600 000**

780 000

89

11 200

Indonesia

**241 000 000**

1 910 000

126

7 930

 

Ukraine

47 400 000

603 000

78

12 700

Iran

**68 000 000**

1 640 000

41

24 200

 

*United Kingdom*

**59 500 000**

***244 000***

*243*

***4 110***

Ireland

4 010 000

70 200

57

17 500

 

USA (ex. Alaska)

**295 000 000**

**8 150 000**

36

27 600

Italy

**58 100 000**

301 000

192

5 180

 

Venezuela

25 300 000

912 000

28

35 900

Japan

**127 000 000**

377 000

337

2 960

 

Vietnam

**83 500 000**

329 000

253

3 940

Kazakhstan

15 100 000

2 710 000

6

178 000

 

Wales

2 910 000

20 700

140

7 110

Kenya

33 800 000

582 000

58

17 200

 

Western Sahara

273 000

266 000

1

974 000

Latin America

**342 000 000**

**17 800 000**

19

52 100

 

World

**6 440 000 000**

**148 000 000**

43

23 100

Latvia

2 290 000

64 500

35

28 200

 

Yemen

20 700 000

527 000

39

25 400

Libya

5 760 000

1 750 000

3.3

305 000

 

Zambia

11 200 000

752 000

15

66 800

Table J.5. Regions and their population densities. Populations above 50
million and areas greater than 5 million km^2^ are highlighted. These
data are displayed graphically in figure J.1 (p338). Data are from 2005.

K   UK energy history {.darkblue}
=====================

Primary fuel

kWh/d/p

kWh(e)/d/p

Oil

 

43

 

 

Natural gas

 

47

 

 

Coal

 

20

 

 

Nuclear

 

9

→

3.4

Hydro

 

 

 

0.2

Other renewables

 

 

 

0.8

![](http://withouthotair.com/cL/figure316.png)

![](http://withouthotair.com/cL/figure317.png)

                                        2006          2007
  ------------------------------------- ------------- -------------
  "Primary units" (the first 2 kWh/d)   10.73 p/kWh   17.43 p/kWh
  "Secondary units" (the rest)          8.13 p/kWh    9.70 p/kWh

Table K.1. Breakdown of primary energy sources in the UK (2004–2006).

Figure K.2. Left: UK net electricity supplied, by source, in kWh per day
per person. (Another 0.9 kWh/d/p is generated and used by the generators
themselves.) Right: the energy gap created by UK power station closures,
as projected by energy company EdF. This graph shows the predicted
*capacity* of nuclear, coal, and oil power stations, in kilowatt-hours
per day per person. The capacity is the maximum deliverable power of a
source.

Figure K.3. Electricity demand in Great Britain (in kWh/d per person)
during two winter weeks of 2006. The peaks in January are at 6pm each
day. (If you’d like to obtain the national demand in GW, the top of the
scale, 24 kWh/d per person, is the same as 60 GW per UK.)

Table K.4. Domestic electricity charges (2006, 2007) for Powergen
customers in Cambridge, including tax.

[![powerChart](powerChart.png)](powerChartL.png)[![carbonChart](carbonChart.png)](carbonChartL.png)

Power translation chart {.darkblue}
=======================

[![powerChart](powerChart.png)](powerChartL.png)

