
#Gadgets

One of the greatest dangers to society is the phone charger. The BBC
News has been warning us of this since 2005:

> “The nuclear power stations will all be switched off in a few years.
> How can we keep Britain’s lights on? ... **unplug your mobile-phone
> charger when it’s not in use**.”

Sadly, a year later, Britain hadn’t got the message, and the BBC was
forced to report:

> “**Britain tops energy waste league**.”

And how did this come about? The BBC rams the message home:

> “65% of UK consumers leave chargers on.”

From the way reporters talk about these planet-destroying black ob-
jects, it’s clear that they are roughly as evil as Darth Vader. But how
evil, exactly?

In this chapter we’ll find out the truth about chargers. We’ll also in-
vestigate their cousins in the gadget parade: computers, phones, and
TVs. Digital set-top boxes. Cable modems. In this chapter we’ll estimate
the power used in running them and charging them, but not in
manufacturing the toys in the first place – we’ll address that in the
later chapter on “stuff.”

The truth about chargers
------------------------

Modern phone chargers, when left plugged in with no phone attached, use
about half a watt. In our preferred units, this is a power consump- tion
of about 0.01 kWh per day. For anyone whose consumption stack is over
100 kWh per day, the BBC’s advice, *always unplug the phone charger*,
could potentially reduce their energy consumption by one hundredth of
one percent (if only they would do it).

> Every little helps!

I don’t think so. Obsessively switching off the phone-charger is like
bailing the Titanic with a teaspoon. Do switch it off, but please be
aware how tiny a gesture it is. Let me put it this way:

> All the energy saved in switching off your charger for one day is used
> up in *one second* of car-driving.

> The energy saved in switching off the charger for *one year* is equal
> to the energy in a single hot bath.

![](figure78.png)

Figure 11.1. Planet destroyers. Spot the difference.

![](figure79.png)

Figure 11.2. These five chargers – three for mobile phones, one for a
pocket PC, and one for a laptop – registered less than one watt on my
power meter.

Admittedly, some older chargers use more than half a watt – if it’s warm
to the touch, it’s probably using one watt or even three (figure 11.3).
A three-watt-guzzling charger uses 0.07 kWh per day. I think that it’s a
good idea to switch off such a charger – it *will* save you three pounds
per year. But don’t kid yourself that you’ve “done your bit” by so
doing. 3W is only a tiny fraction of total energy consumption.

OK, that’s enough bailing the Titanic with a teaspoon. Let’s find out
where the electricity is really being used.

Gadgets that really suck
------------------------

Table 11.4 shows the power consumptions, in watts, of a houseful of gad-
gets. The first column shows the power consumption when the device is
actually being used – for example, when a sound system is actually play-
ing sound. The second column shows the consumption when the device is
switched on, but sitting doing nothing. I was particularly shocked to
find that a laser-printer sitting idle consumes 17 W – the same as the
average consumption of a fridge-freezer! The third column shows the
consump- tion when the gadget is explicitly asked to go to sleep or
standby. The fourth shows the consumption when it is completely switched
off – but still left plugged in to the mains. I’m showing all these
powers in watts – to convert back to our standard units, remember that
40 W is 1 kWh/d. A nice rule of thumb, by the way, is that each watt
costs about one pound per year (assuming electricity costs 10p per kWh).

The biggest guzzlers are the computer, its screen, and the television,
whose consumption is in the hundreds of watts, when on. Entertainment
systems such as stereos and DVD players swarm in the computer’s wake,
many of them consuming 10 W or so. A DVD player may cost just £20 in the
shop, but if you leave it switched on all the time, it’s costing you
another £10 per year. Some stereos and computer peripherals consume
several watts even when switched off, thanks to their
mains-transformers. To be sure that a gadget is truly off, you need to
switch it off at the wall.

### Powering the hidden tendrils of the information age

According to Jonathan Koomey (2007), the computer-servers in US data-
centres and their associated plumbing (air conditioners, backup power
sys- tems, and so forth) consumed 0.4 kWh per day per person – just over
1% of US electricity consumption. That’s the consumption figure for
2005, which, by the way, is twice as big as the consumption in 2000,
because the number of servers grew from 5.6 million to 10 million.

![](figure80.png)

Figure 11.3. This wasteful cordless phone and its charger use 3 W when
left plugged in. That’s 0.07 kWh/d. If electricity costs 10p per kWh
then a 3 W trickle costs £3 per year.

Gadget

Power consumption (W)

on and active

on but inactive

standby

off

Computer and peripherals:

computer box

80

55

2

cathode-ray display

110

3

0

LCD display

34

2

1

projector

150

5

laser printer

500

17

wireless & cable-modem

9

Laptop computer

16

9

0.5

Portable CD player

2

Bedside clock-radio

1.1

1

Bedside clock-radio

1.9

1.4

Digital radio

9.1

3

Radio cassette-player

3

1.2

1.2

Stereo amplifier

6

6

Stereo amplifier II

13

0

Home cinema sound

7

7

4

DVD player

7

6

DVD player II

12

10

5

TV

100

10

Video recorder

13

1

Digital TV set top box

6

5

Clock on microwave oven

2

Xbox

160

2.4

Sony Playstation 3

190

2

Nintendo Wii

18

2

Answering machine

2

Answering machine II

3

Cordless telephone

1.7

Mobile phone charger

5

0.5

Vacuum cleaner

1600

Table 11.4. Power consumptions ofvarious gadgets, in watts. 40 W
is1 kWh/d.

![](figure409.png)

### Other gadgets

A vacuum cleaner, if you use it for a couple of hours per week, is
equiva- lent to about 0.2 kWh/d. Mowing the lawn uses about 0.6 kWh. We
could go on, but I suspect that computers and entertainment systems are
the big suckers on most people’s electrical balance-sheet.

This chapter’s summary figure: it’ll depend how many gadgets you have at
home and work, but a healthy houseful or officeful of gadgets left on
all the time could easily use 5 kWh/d.

### Mythconceptions

#### “There is no point in my switching off lights, TVs, and phone chargers during the winter. The ‘wasted’ energy they put out heats my home, so it’s not wasted.”

This myth is *True* for a few people, but only during the winter; but
*False* for most.

If your house is being heated by electricity through ordinary bar fires
or blower heaters then, yes, it’s much the same as heating the house
with any electricity-wasting appliances. But if you are in this
situation, you should change the way you heat your house. Electricity is
high-grade energy, and heat is low-grade energy. *It’s a waste to turn
electricity into heat*. To be precise, if you make only one unit of heat
from a unit of electricity, that’s a waste. Heaters called air-source
heat pumps or ground-source heat pumps can do much better, delivering 3
or 4 units of heat for every unit of electricity consumed. They work
like back-to-front refrigerators, pumping heat into your house from the
outside air (see Chapter 21).

For the rest, whose homes are heated by fossil fuels or biofuels, it’s a
good idea to avoid using electrical gadgets as a heat source for your
home – at least for as long as our increases in electricity-demand are
served from fossil fuels. It’s better to burn the fossil fuel at home.
The point is, if you use electricity from an ordinary fossil power
station, more than half of the energy from the fossil fuel goes sadly up
the cooling tower. Of the energy that gets turned into electricity,
about 8% is lost in the transmission system. If you burn the fossil fuel
in your home, more of the energy goes directly into making hot air for
you.

Notes and further reading
-------------------------

page no.

68*The BBC News has been warning us ... unplug your mobile-phone
charger*. The BBC News article from 2005 said: “the nuclear power
stations will all be switched off in a few years. How can we keep
Britain’s lights on? Here’s three ways you can save energy: switch off
video recorders when they’re not in use; don’t leave televisions on
standby; and unplug your mobile-phone charger when it’s not in use.”

![](figure81.png)

Figure 11.5. Information systems and other gadgets.

68*Modern phone chargers, when left plugged in with no phone attached,
use about half a watt*. The Maplin power meter in figure 11.2 is not
accu- rate enough to measure this sort of power. I am grateful to Sven
Weier and Richard McMahon of Cambridge University Engineering Department
who measured a standard Nokia charger in an accurate calorimeter; they
found that, when not connected to the mobile, it wastes 0.472 W. They
made additional interesting measurements: the charger, when connected to
a fully-charged mobile phone, wastes 0.845 W; and when the charger is
do- ing what it’s meant to do, charging a partly-charged Nokia mobile,
it wastes 4.146 W as heat. Pedants sometimes ask “what about the
*reactive power* of the charger?” This is a technical niggle, not really
worth our time. For the record, I measured the reactive power (with a
crummy meter) and found it to be about 2 VA per charger. Given that the
power loss in the national grid is 8% of the delivered power, I reckon
that the power loss associated with the reactive power is at most 0.16
W. When actually making a phone-call, the mobile uses 1 W.

Further reading: Kuehr (2003).

![](figure82.png)

Figure 11.6. Advertisement from the “DIY planet repairs” campaign. The
text reads “**Unplug**. If every London household unplugged their
mobile-phone chargers when not in use, we could save 31,000 tonnes of
CO~2~ and £7.75m per year.” london.gov.uk/diy/

![](figure410.png)
