#Can we live on renewables?

The red stack in figure 18.1 adds up to 195 kWh per day per person. The
green stack adds up to about 180 kWh/d/p. A close race! But please
remember: in calculating our production stack we threw all economic,
social, and environmental constraints to the wind. Also, some of our
green contributors are probably incompatible with each other: our
photovoltaic panels and hot-water panels would clash with each other on
roofs; and our solar photovoltaic farms using 5% of the country might
compete with the energy crops with which we covered 75% of the country.
If we were to lose just one of our bigger green contributors – for
example, if we decided that deep offshore wind is not an option, or that
panelling 5% of the country with photovoltaics at a cost of £200 000 per
person is not on – then the production stack would no longer match the
consumption stack.

Furthermore, even if our red consumption stack were lower than our green
production stack, it would not necessarily mean our energy sums are
adding up. You can’t power a TV with cat food, nor can you feed a cat
from a wind turbine. Energy exists in different forms – chemical,
electrical, kinetic, and heat, for example. For a sustainable energy
plan to add up, we need both the forms and amounts of energy consumption
and production to match up. Converting energy from one form to another –
from chemical to electrical, as at a fossil-fuel power station, or from
electrical to chemical, as in a factory making hydrogen from water –
usually involves substantial losses of useful energy. We will come back
to this important detail in Chapter 27, which will describe some energy
plans that do add up.

Here we’ll reflect on our estimates of consumption and production,
compare them with official averages and with other people’s estimates,
and discuss how much power renewables could plausibly deliver in a
country like Britain.

The questions we’ll address in this chapter are:

1.  Is the size of the red stack roughly correct? What is the *average*
    con- sumption of Britain? We’ll look at the official
    energy-consumption numbers for Britain and a few other countries.
2.  Have I been unfair to renewables, underestimating their potential?
    We’ll compare the estimates in the green stack with estimates pub-
    lished by organizations such as the Sustainable Development Com-
    mission, the Institution of Electrical Engineers, and the Centre for
    Alternative Technology.
3.  What happens to the green stack when we take into account social and
    economic constraints?

![](figure125.png)

Figure 18.1. The state of play after we added up all the traditional
renewables.

Red reflections
---------------

Our estimate of a typical affluent person’s consumption (figure 18.1)
has reached 195 kWh per day. It is indeed true that many people use this
much energy, and that many more aspire to such levels of consumption.
The *average* American consumes about 250 kWh per day. If we all raised
our standard of consumption to an average American level, the green pro-
duction stack would definitely be dwarfed by the red consumption stack.

What about the average European and the average Brit? Average Eu- ropean
consumption of “primary energy” (which means the energy con- tained in
raw fuels, plus wind and hydroelectricity) is about 125 kWh per day per
person. The UK average is also 125 kWh per day per person.

These official averages do not include two energy flows. First, the “em-
bedded energy” in *imported* stuff (the energy expended in making the
stuff) is not included at all. We estimated in Chapter 15 that the
embedded energy in imported stuff is at least 40 kWh/d per person.
Second, the official estimates of “primary energy consumption” include
only industrial energy flows – things like fossil fuels and
hydroelectricity – and don’t keep track of the natural embedded energy
in food: energy that was originally harnessed by photosynthesis.

Another difference between the red stack we slapped together and the
national total is that in most of the consumption chapters so far we
tended to ignore the energy lost in converting energy from one form to
another, and in transporting energy around. For example, the “car”
estimate in Part I covered only the energy in the petrol, not the energy
used at the oil refinery that makes the petrol, nor the energy used in
trundling the oil and petrol from A to B. The national total accounts
for all the energy, before any conversion losses. Conversion losses in
fact account for about 22% of total national energy consumption. Most of
these conversion losses happen at power stations. Losses in the
electricity transmission network chuck away 1% of total national energy
consumption.

When building our red stack, we tried to imagine how much energy a
typical affluent person uses. Has this approach biased our perception of
the importance of different activities? Let’s look at some official
numbers. Figure 18.2 shows the breakdown of energy consumption by end
use. The top two categories are transport and heating (hot air and hot
water). Those two categories also dominated the red stack in Part I.
Good.

Road transport

Petroleum

22.5

Railways

Petroleum

0.4

Water transport

Petroleum

1.0

Aviation

Petroleum

7.4

All modes

Electricity

0.4

All energy used by transport

31.6

![](figure129.png)

Figure 18.2. Energy consumption, broken down by end use, according to
the Department for Trade and Industry.

Table 18.3. 2006 breakdown of energy consumption by transport mode, in
kWh/d per person. Source: Dept. for Transport (2007).

![](figure126.png)

Let’s look more closely at transport. In our red stack, we found that
the energy footprints of driving a car 50 km per day and of flying to
Cape Town once per year are roughly equal. Table 18.3 shows the relative
im- portances of the different transport modes in the national
balance-sheet. In the national averages, aviation is smaller than road
transport.

How do Britain’s official consumption figures compare with those of
other countries? Figure 18.4 shows the power consumptions of lots of
countries or regions, versus their gross domestic products (GDPs).
There’s an evident correlation between power consumption and GDP: the
higher a country’s GDP (per capita), the more power it consumes per
capita. The UK is a fairly typical high-GDP country, surrounded by
Germany, France, Japan, Austria, Ireland, Switzerland, and Denmark. The
only notable ex- ception to the rule “big GDP implies big power
consumption” is Hong Kong. Hong Kong’s GDP per capita is about the same
as Britain’s, but

Figure 18.4. Power consumption per capita, versus GDP per capita, in
purchasing-power-parity US dollars. Squares show countries having “high
human development;” circles, “medium” or “low.” Figure 30.1 (p231) shows
the same data on logarithmic scales.

![](figure127.png)

Hong Kong’s power consumption is about 80 kWh/d/p.

The message I take from these country comparisons is that the UK is a
fairly typical European country, and therefore provides a good case
study for asking the question “How can a country with a high quality of
life get its energy sustainably?”

Green reflections
-----------------

People often say that Britain has plenty of renewables. Have I been mean
to green? Are my numbers a load of rubbish? Have I underestimated sus-
tainable production? Let’s compare my green numbers first with several
estimates found in the Sustainable Development Commission’s publication
*The role of nuclear power in a low carbon economy. Reducing CO~2~
emissions – nuclear and the alternatives*. Remarkably, even though the
Sustainable Development Commission’s take on sustainable resources is
very positive (“We have huge tidal, wave, biomass and solar resources”),
*all the estimates in the Sustainable Development Commission’s document
are smaller than mine!* (To be precise, all the estimates of the
renewables total are smaller thanmy total.) The Sustainable Development
Commission’s publication givesestimates from four sources detailed below
(IEE, Tyndall, IAG, and PIU). Figure 18.6 shows my estimates alongside
numbers from these four sources and numbers from the Centre for
Alternative Technology (CAT). Here’s a description of each source.

IEEThe Institute of Electrical Engineers published a report on renewable
energy in 2002 – a summary of possible contributions from renew- ables
in the UK. The second column of figure 18.6 shows the “technical
potential” of a variety of renewable technologies for UK electricity
generation – “an upper limit that is unlikely ever to be exceeded even
with quite dramatic changes in the structure of our society and
economy.” According to the IEE, the total of all renewables’ technical
potential is about 27 kWh/d per person.

Figure 18.5. Hong Kong. Photo by Samuel Louie and Carol Spears.

**Tyndall**   The Tyndall Centre’s estimate of the total practicable
renewable- energy resource is 15 kWh per day per person.

IAGThe Interdepartmental Analysts Group’s estimates of renewables, take
into account economic constraints. Their total practical *and* eco-
nomical resource (at a retail price of 7p/kWh) is 12 kWh per day per
person.

PIUThe “PIU” column shows the “indicative resource potential for renew-
able electricity generation options” from the DTI’s contribution to the
PIU review in 2001. For each technology I show their “practical
maximum,” or, if no practical maximum was given, their “theoretical
maximum.”

CATThe final column shows the numbers from the Centre for Alternative
Technology’s “Island Britain” plan Helweg-Larsen and Bull (2007).

### Bio-powered Europe

Sometimes people ask me “surely we used to live on renewables just fine,
before the Industrial Revolution?” Yes, but don’t forget that two things
were different then: lifestyles, and population densities.

Turning the clock back more than 400 years, Europe lived almost en-
tirely on sustainable sources: mainly wood and crops, augmented by a
little wind power, tidal power, and water power. It’s been estimated
that the average person’s lifestyle consumed a power of 20 kWh per day.
The wood used per person was 4 kg per day, which required 1 hectare (10
000 m^2^) of forest per person. The area of land per person in Europe in
the 1700s was 52 000 m^2^. In the regions with highest population
density, the area per per- son was 17 500 m^2^ of arable land, pastures,
and woods. Today the area of Britain per person is just 4000 m^2^, so
even if we reverted to the lifestyle of the Middle Ages and completely
forested the country, we could no longer live sustainably here. Our
population density is far too high.

Green ambitions meet social reality
-----------------------------------

Figure 18.1 is bleak news. Yes, technically, Britain has “huge”
renewables. But realistically, I don’t think Britain can live on its own
renewables – at least not the way we currently live. I am partly driven
to this conclusion by the chorus of opposition that greets any major
renewable energy proposal. People love renewable energy, *unless it is
bigger than a figleaf*. If the British are good at one thing, it’s
saying “no.”

Wind farms?

“No, they’re ugly noisy things.”

Solar panels on roofs?

“No, they would spoil the visual amenity of the street.”

![](figure131.png)

More forestry?

“No, it ruins the countryside.”

Waste incineration?

“No, I’m worried about health risks, traffic con- gestion, dust and
noise.”

Hydroelectricity?

“Yes, but not big hydro – that harms the environ- ment.”

Offshore wind?

“No, I’m more worried about the ugly powerlines coming ashore than I was
about a Nazi invasion.”

Wave or geothermal power?

“No, far too expensive.”

After all these objections, I fear that the maximum Britain would ever
get from renewables would be something like what’s shown in the bottom
right of figure 18.7.

Figure 18.8 offers guidance to anyone trying to erect wind farms in
Britain. On a map of the British mainland I’ve shown in white a 2-km
radius exclusion zone surrounding every hamlet, village, and town. These
white areas would presumably be excluded from wind-farm development
because they are too close to the humans. I’ve coloured in black all
regions

Figure 18.8. Where the wild things are. One of the grounds for objecting
to wind farms is the noise they produce. I’ve chopped out of this map of
the British mainland a 2-km-radius exclusion zone surrounding every
hamlet, village, and town. These white areas would presumably be
excluded from wind-farm development. The remaining black areas would
perhaps also be largely excluded because of the need to protect tranquil
places from industrialization. Settlement data from
www.openstreetmap.org.

![](figure132.png)

that are *more than 2 km* from any human settlement. These areas are
largely excluded from wind-farm development because they are *tranquil*,
and it’s essential to protect tranquil places from industrialization. If
you want to avoid objections to your wind farm, pick any piece of land
that is not coloured black or white.

> Some of these environmentalists who have good hearts but confused
> minds are almost a barrier to tackling climate change.
>
> Malcolm Wicks, Minister of State for Energy

We are drawing to the close of Part I. The assumption was that we want
to get off fossil fuels, for one or more of the reasons listed in
Chapter 1 – climate change, security of supply, and so forth. Figure
18.9 shows how much power we currently get from renewables and nuclear.
They amount to just 4% of our total power consumption.

The two conclusions we can draw from Part I are:

1.  *To make a difference, renewable facilities have to be
    country-sized*.
2.  For any renewable facility to make a contribution comparable to our
    current consumption, *it has to be country-sized*. To get a big
    contribu- tion from wind, we used wind farms with the area of Wales.
    To get a

Figure 18.9. Production of renewables and nuclear energy in the UK in
2006. All powers are expressed per-person, as usual. The breakdown of
the renewables on the right hand side is scaled up 100-fold vertically.

1.  big contribution from solar photovoltaics, we required half the area
    of Wales. To get a big contribution from waves, we imagined wave
    farms covering 500 km of coastline. To make energy crops with a big
    contribution, we took 75% of the whole country.
2.  Renewable facilities have to be country-sized because all renewables
    are so diffuse. Table 18.10 summarizes most of the powers-per-unit-
    area that we encountered in Part I.
3.  To sustain Britain’s lifestyle on its renewables alone would be very
    difficult. A renewable-based energy solution will necessarily be
    large and intrusive.
4.  2.*It’s not going to be easy* to make a plan that adds up using
    renewables alone. If we are serious about getting off fossil fuels,
    Brits are going to have to learn to start saying “yes” to something.
    Indeed to several somethings.

In Part II I’ll ask, “assuming that we can’t get production from renew-
ables to add up to our current consumption, what are the other options?”

Notes and further reading
-------------------------

page no.

104*UK average energy consumption is 125 kWh per day per person*. I took
this number from the UNDP Human Devel- opment Report, 2007. The DTI (now
known as DBERR) publishes a Digest of United Kingdom Energy Statistics
every year. [uzek2]. In 2006, according to DUKES, total primary energy
demand was 244 million tons of oil equivalent, which corresponds to 130
kWh per day per person. I don’t know the reason for the small difference
between the UNDP number and the DUKES number, but I can explain why I
chose the slightly lower number. As I mentioned on p27, DUKES uses the
same energy-summing convention as me, declaring one kWh of chemical
energy to be equal to one kWh of electricity. But there’s one minor
exception: DUKES defines the “primary energy” produced in nuclear power
stations to be the thermal energy, which in 2006 was 9 kWh/d/p; this was
converted (with 38% efficiency) to 3.4 kWh/d/p of supplied electricity;
in my accounts, I’ve focused on the electricity produced by
hydroelectricity, other renewables, and nuclear power; this small switch
in convention reduces the nuclear contribution by about 5 kWh/d/p.

–*Losses in the electricity transmission network chuck away 1% of total
national energy consumption*. To put it another way, the losses are 8%
of the electricity generated. This 8% loss can be broken down: roughly
1.5% is lost in the long-distance high-voltage system, and 6% in the
local public supply system. Source: MacLeay et al. (2007).

105*Figure 18.4*. Data from UNDP Human Development Report, 2007.
[3av4s9]

108*In the Middle Ages, the average person’s lifestyle consumed a power
of 20 kWh per day*. Source: Malanima (2006).

110*“I’m more worried about the ugly powerlines coming ashore than I was
about a Nazi invasion.”* Source: [6frj55].

Power per unit land or water area

Wind

2 W/m^2^

Offshore wind

3 W/m^2^

Tidal pools

3 W/m^2^

Tidal stream

6 W/m^2^

Solar PV panels

5-20 W/m^2^

Plants

0.5 W/m^2^

Rain-water   (highlands)

0.24 W/m^2^

Hydroelectric   facility

11 W/m^2^

Geothermal

0.017 W/m^2^

Table 18.10. Renewable facilities have to be country-sized because all
renewables are so diffuse.

