#Heating and cooling

This chapter explores how much power we spend controlling the
temper-ature of our surroundings – at home and at work – and on warming
orcooling our food, drink, laundry, and dirty dishes.

Domestic water heating
----------------------

The biggest use of hot water in a house might be baths, showers,
dish-washing, or clothes-washing – it depends on your lifestyle. Let’s
estimatefirst the energy used by taking a hot bath.

The volume of bath-water is 50 cm × 15 cm × 150 cm ≈ 110 litre. Saythe
temperature of the bath is 50 °C (120 F) and the water coming into
thehouse is at 10 °C. The heat capacity of water, which measures how
muchenergy is required to heat it up, is 4200 J per litre per °C. So the
energyrequired to heat up the water by 40 °C is

4200 J/litre/°C × 110 litre × 40 °C ≈ 18 MJ ≈ 5 kWh.

So taking a bath uses about 5 kWh. For comparison, taking a shower(30
litres) uses about 1.4 kWh.

### Kettles and cookers

Britain, being a civilized country, has a 230 volt domestic electricity
supply.With this supply, we can use an electric kettle to boil several
litres of waterin a couple of minutes. Such kettles have a power of 3
kW. Why 3 kW?Because this is the biggest power that a 230 volt outlet
can deliver with-out the current exceeding the maximum permitted, 13
amps. In countrieswhere the voltage is 110 volts, it takes twice as long
to make a pot of tea.

If a household has the kettle on for 20 minutes per day, that’s an
averagepower consumption of 1 kWh per day. (I’ll work out the next few
items“per household,” with 2 people per household.)

One small ring on an electric cooker has the same power as a toaster:1
kW. The higher-power hot plates deliver 2.3 kW. If you use two ringsof
the cooker on full power for half an hour per day, that corresponds
to1.6 kWh per day.

A microwave oven usually has its cooking power marked on the front:mine
says 900 W, but it actually *consumes* about 1.4 kW. If you use
themicrowave for 20 minutes per day, that’s 0.5 kWh per day.

A regular oven guzzles more: about 3 kW when on full. If you use theoven
for one hour per day, and the oven’s on full power for half of thattime,
that’s 1.5 kWh per day.

![](figure53.png)

Figure 7.1. A flock of new houses.

![](figure54.png)

Figure 7.2. The water in a bath.

230 V × 13 A = 3000 W

![](figure55.png)

Figure 7.3. Power consumption by a heating and cooling device.

Device

power

timeper day

energyper day

Cooking

– kettle

3 kW

1⁄3 h

1 kWh/d

– microwave

1.4 kW

1⁄3 h

0.5 kWh/d

– electric cooker (rings)

3.3 kW

½ h

1.6 kWh/d

– electric oven

3 kW

½ h

1.5 kWh/d

Cleaning

– washing machine

2.5 kW

1 kWh/d

– tumble dryer

2.5 kW

0.8 h

2 kWh/d

– airing-cupboard drying

0.5 kWh/d

– washing-line drying

0 kWh/d

– dishwasher

2.5 kW

1.5 kWh/d

Cooling

– refrigerator

0.02 kW

24 h

0.5 kWh/d

– freezer

0.09 kW

24 h

2.3 kWh/d

– air-conditioning

0.6 kW

1 h

0.6 kWh/d

### Hot clothes and hot dishes

A clothes washer, dishwasher, and tumble dryer all use a power of
about2.5 kW when running.

A clothes washer uses about 80 litres of water per load, with an
energycost of about 1 kWh if the temperature is set to 40 °C. If we use
an indoorairing-cupboard instead of a tumble dryer to dry clothes, heat
is still requiredto evaporate the water – roughly 1.5 kWh to dry one
load of clothes,instead of 3 kWh.

Totting up the estimates relating to hot water, I think it’s easy to
useabout 12 kWh per day per person.

Hot air – at home and at work
-----------------------------

Now, does more power go into making hot water and hot food, or
intomaking hot air via our buildings’ radiators?

One way to estimate the energy used per day for hot air is to imaginea
building heated instead by electric fires, whose powers are more
familiarto us. The power of a small electric bar fire or electric fan
heater is 1 kW(24 kWh per day). In winter, you might need one of these
per person tokeep toasty. In summer, none. So we estimate that on
average one modernperson *needs* to use 12 kWh per day on hot air. But
most people use morethan they need, keeping several rooms warm
simultaneously (kitchen, livingroom, corridor, and bathroom, say). So a
plausible consumption figurefor hot air is about double that: 24 kWh per
day per person.

This chapter’s companion Chapter E contains a more detailed accountof
where the heat is going in a building; this model makes it possible to

Table 7.4. Energy consumption figures for heating and cooling devices,
per household.

![](figure56.png)

Figure 7.5. The hot water total at both home and work – including
bathing, showering, clothes washing, cookers, kettles, microwave oven,
and dishwashing – is about 12 kWh per day per person. I’ve given this
box a light colour to indicate that this power could be delivered by
low-grade thermal energy.

![](figure57.png)

Figure 7.6. A big electric heater: 2 kW.

predict the heat savings from turning the thermostat down,
double-glazingthe windows, and so forth.

### Warming the outdoors, and other luxuries

There’s a growing trend of warming the outdoors with patio heaters. Typ-
ical patio heaters have a power of 15 kW. So if you use one of these for
acouple of hours every evening, you are using an extra 30 kWh per day.

A more modest luxury is an electric blanket. An electric blanket for
adouble bed uses 140 W; switching it on for one hour uses 0.14 kWh.

Cooling
-------

### Fridge and freezer

We control the temperatures not only of the hot water and hot air
withwhich we surround ourselves, but also of the cold cupboards we
squeezeinto our hothouses. My fridge-freezer, pictured in figure 7.3,
consumes18 W on average – that’s roughly 0.5 kWh/d.

### Air-conditioning

In countries where the temperature gets above 30 °C, air-conditioning
isviewed as a necessity, and the energy cost of delivering that
temperaturecontrol can be large. However, this part of the book is about
British energyconsumption, and Britain’s temperatures provide little
need for air- conditioning (figure 7.8).

![](figure59.png)

An economical way to get air-conditioning is an air-source heat pump.A
window-mounted electric air-conditioning unit for a single room uses0.6
kW of electricity and (by heat-exchanger) delivers 2.6 kW of cooling.
Toestimate how much energy someone might use in the UK, I assumed
theymight switch such an air-conditioning unit on for about 12 hours per
dayon 30 days of the year. On the days when it’s on, the air-conditioner
uses7.2 kWh. The average consumption over the whole year is 0.6 kWh/d.

This chapter’s estimate of the energy cost of cooling – 1 kWh/d
perperson – includes this air-conditioning and a domestic refrigerator.
Society

![](figure58.png)

Figure 7.7. Hot air total – including domestic and workplace heating –
about 24 kWh per day per person.

Figure 7.8. Cambridge temperature in degrees Celsius, daily (red line),
and half-hourly (blue line) during 2006.

![](figure60.png)

Figure 7.9. Cooling total – including a refrigerator (fridge/freezer)
and a little summer air-conditioning – 1 kWh/d.

8   Hydroelectricity {.green}
====================

To make hydroelectric power, you need altitude, and you need
rainfall.Let’s estimate the total energy of all the rain as it runs down
to sea-level.

For this hydroelectric forecast, I’ll divide Britain into two: the
lower,dryer bits, which I’ll call “the lowlands;” and the higher, wetter
bits, whichI’ll call “the highlands.” I’ll choose Bedford and Kinlochewe
as my repre-sentatives of these two regions.

Let’s do the lowlands first. To estimate the gravitational power of
low-land rain, we multiply the rainfall in Bedford (584 mm per year) by
thedensity of water (1000 kg/m^3^), the strength of gravity (10 m/s^2^)
and thetypical lowland altitude above the sea (say 100 m). The power per
unitarea works out to 0.02 W/m^2^. That’s the power per unit area of
land onwhich rain falls.

When we multiply this by the area per person (2700 m^2^, if the
lowlandsare equally shared between all 60 million Brits), we find an
average rawpower of about 1 kWh per day per person. This is the absolute
upperlimit for lowland hydroelectric power, if every river were dammed
andevery drop perfectly exploited. Realistically, we will only ever dam
riverswith substantial height drops, with catchment areas much smaller
than thewhole country. Much of the water evaporates before it gets
anywhere neara turbine, and no hydroelectric system exploits the full
potential energy ofthe water. We thus arrive at a firm conclusion about
lowland water power.People may enjoy making “run-of-the-river” hydro and
other small-scalehydroelectric schemes, but such lowland facilities can
never deliver morethan 1 kWh per day per person.

![](figure407.png)

![](figure64.png)

Figure 8.1. Nant-y-Moch dam, part of a 55 MW hydroelectric scheme in
Wales. Photo by Dave Newbould, www.origins-photography.co.uk.

![](figure406.png)

[^**Erratum**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#55)

Figure 8.2. Altitudes of land in Britain. The rectangles show how much
land area there is at each height.

Ch 8 Page 56 Sustainable Energy - without the hot air

Let’s turn to the highlands. Kinlochewe is a rainier spot: it gets 2278
mmper year, four times more than Bedford. The height drops there are
biggertoo – large areas of land are above 300 m. So overall a
twelve-fold increasein power per square metre is plausible for
mountainous regions. The rawpower per unit area is roughly 0.24 W/m^2^.
If the highlands generouslyshare their hydro-power with the rest of the
UK (at 1300 m^2^ area per per-son), we find an upper limit of about 7
kWh per day per person. As inthe lowlands, this is the upper limit on
raw power if evaporation wereoutlawed and every drop were perfectly
exploited.

What should we estimate is the plausible practical limit? Let’s guess20%
of this – 1.4 kWh per day, and round it up a little to allow for
produc-tion in the lowlands: 1.5 kWh per day.

The actual power from hydroelectricity in the UK today is 0.2 kWh/dper
person, so this 1.5 kWh/d per person would require a seven-fold
in-crease in hydroelectric power.

Notes and further reading
-------------------------

55*Rainfall* statistics are from the BBC weather centre.

56*The raw power per unit area [of Highland rain] is roughly 0.24
W/m^2^*. Wecan check this estimate against the actual power density of
the Loch Sloyhydro-electric scheme, completed in 1950 (Ross, 2008). The
catchment areaof Loch Sloy is about 83 km^2^; the rainfall there is
about 2900 mm per year(a bit higher than the 2278 mm/y of Kinlochewe);
and the electricity outputin 2006 was 142 GWh per year, which
corresponds to a power density of0.2W per m^2^ of catchment area. Loch
Sloy’s surface area is about 1.5 km^2^,so the hydroelectric facility
itself has a[^**E**^](http://www.withouthotair.com/Errata.html#56) per
unit lake area of 11 W/m^2^. Sothe hillsides, aqueducts, and tunnels
bringing water to Loch Sloy act like a55-fold power concentrator.

–*The actual power from hydroelectricity in the UK today is 0.2 kWh per
dayper person*. Source: MacLeay et al. (2007). In 2006, large-scale
hydro pro-duced 3515 GWh (from plant with a capacity of 1.37 GW);
small-scale hydro,212 GWh (0.01 kWh/d/p) (from a capacity of 153 MW).In
1943, when the growth of hydroelectricity was in full swing, the Northof
Scotland Hydroelectricity Board’s engineers estimated that the
Highlandsof Scotland could produce 6.3 TWh per year in 102 facilities –
that wouldcorrespond to 0.3 kWh/d per person in the UK (Ross,
2008).Glendoe, the first new large-scale hydroelectric project in the UK
since 1957,will add capacity of 100 MW and is expected to deliver 180
GWh per year.Glendoe’s catchment area is 75 km^2^, so its power density
works out to 0.27 Wper m^2^ of catchment area. Glendoe has been billed
as “big enough to powerGlasgow.” But if we share its 180 GWh per year
across the population ofGlasgow (616 000 people), we get only 0.8 kWh/d
per person. That is just5% of the average electricity consumption of 17
kWh/d per person. The 20-fold exaggeration is achieved by focusing on
Glendoe’s peak output ratherthan its average, which is 5 times smaller;
and by discussing “homes” ratherthan the total electrical power of
Glasgow (see p329).

![](figure65.png)

Figure 8.3. Hydroelectricity.

![](figure66.png)

Figure 8.4. A 60 kW waterwheel.
