#Light

Lighting home and work
----------------------

The brightest domestic lightbulbs use 250 W, and bedside lamps use 40
W.In an old-fashioned incandescent bulb, most of this power gets turned
intoheat, rather than light. A fluorescent tube can produce an equal
amountof light using one quarter of the power of an incandescent bulb.

How much power does a moderately affluent person use for lighting?My
rough estimate, based on table 9.2, is that a typical two-person
homewith a mix of low-energy and high-energy bulbs uses about 5.5 kWh
perday, or 2.7 kWh per day per person. I assume that each person also
hasa workplace where they share similar illumination with their
colleagues;guessing that the workplace uses 1.3 kWh/d per person, we get
a roundfigure of 4 kWh/d per person.

Street-lights and traffic lights
--------------------------------

Do we need to include public lighting too, to get an accurate estimate,
ordo home and work dominate the lighting budget? Street-lights in fact
useabout 0.1 kWh per day per person, and traffic lights only 0.005 kWh/d
perperson – both negligible, compared with our home and workplace
lighting.What about other forms of public lighting – illuminated signs
and bollards,for example? There are fewer of them than street-lights;
and street-lightsalready came in well under our radar, so we don’t need
to modify ouroverall estimate of 4 kWh/d per person.

Lights on the traffic

In some countries, drivers must switch their lights on whenever their
caris moving. How does the extra power required by that policy
comparewith the power already being used to trundle the car around?
Let’s saythe car has four incandescent lights totalling 100 W. The
electricity forthose bulbs is supplied by a 25%-efficient engine
powering a 55%-efficientgenerator, so the power required is 730 W. For
comparison, a typical cargoing at an average speed of 50 km/h and
consuming one litre per 12 km

  Device                   power    Time per day   Energy per dayper home
  ------------------------ -------- -------------- ------------------------
  10 incandescent lights   1 kW     5 h            5 kWh
  10 low-energy lights     0.1 kW   5 h            0.5 kWh

![](figure67.png)

Figure 9.1. Lighting – 4 kWh per day per person.

Table 9.2. Electric consumption for domestic lighting. A plausible total
is 5.5 kWh per home per day; and a similar figure at work; perhaps 4 kWh
per day per person.

has an average power consumption of 42 000W. So having the lights
onwhile driving requires 2% extra power.

What about the future’s electric cars? The power consumption of atypical
electric car is about 5000 W. So popping on an extra 100 W wouldincrease
its consumption by 2%. Power consumption would be smallerif we switched
all car lights to light-emitting diodes, but if we pay anymore attention
to this topic, we will be coming down with a severe case
ofevery-little-helps-ism.

The economics of low-energy bulbs
---------------------------------

Generally I avoid discussing economics, but I’d like to make an
exceptionfor lightbulbs. Osram’s 20 W low-energy bulb claims the same
lightoutput as a 100 W incandescent bulb. Moreover, its lifetime is said
to be15 000 hours (or “12 years,” at 3 hours per day). In contrast a
typical in-candescent bulb might last 1000 hours. So during a 12-year
period, youhave this choice (figure 9.3): buy 15 incandescent bulbs and
1500 kWh ofelectricity (which costs roughly £150); or buy one low-energy
bulb and300 kWh of electricity (which costs roughly £30).

#### Should I wait until the old bulb dies before replacing it?

It feels like a waste, doesn’t it? Someone put resources into making
theold incandescent lightbulb; shouldn’t we cash in that original
investmentby using the bulb until it’s worn out? But the economic answer
is clear:*continuing to use an old lightbulb is throwing good money
after bad*. If youcan find a satisfactory low-energy replacement,
replace the old bulb now.

#### What about the mercury in compact fluorescent lights? Are LEDbulbs better than fluorescents?

Researchers say that LED (light-emitting diode) bulbs will soon be
evenmore energy-efficient than compact fluorescent lights. The
efficiency of alight is measured in *lumens per watt*. I checked the
numbers on my latestpurchases: the Philips Genie 11 W compact
fluorescent bulb (figure 9.4)has a brightness of 600 lumens, which is an
efficiency of **55 lumens perwatt**; regular incandescent bulbs deliver
**10 lumens per watt**; the Omicron1.3 W lamp, which has 20 white LEDs
hiding inside it, has a brightnessof 46 lumens, which is an efficiency
of **35 lumens per watt**. So this LEDbulb is almost as efficient as the
fluorescent bulb. The LED industry stillhas a little catching up to do.
In its favour, the LED bulb has a life of50 000 hours, eight times the
life of the fluorescent bulb. As I write, Isee that www.cree.com is
selling LEDs with a power of **100 lumens perwatt**. It’s projected that
in the future, white LEDs will have an efficiencyof over 150 lumens per
watt [ynjzej]. I expect that within another coupleof years, the best
advice, from the point of view of both energy efficiencyand avoiding
mercury pollution, will be to use LED bulbs.

![](figure68.png)

Figure 9.3. Total cumulative cost of using a traditional incandescent
100 W bulb for 3 hours per day, compared with replacing it *now* with an
Osram Dulux Longlife Energy Saver (pictured). Assumptions: electricity
costs 10p per kWh; replacement traditional bulbs cost 45p each;
energy-saving bulbs cost £9. (I know you can find them cheaper than
this, but this graph shows that even at £9, they’re much more
economical.)

![](figure69.png)

Figure 9.4. Philips 11 W alongside Omicron 1.3 W LED bulb.

### Mythconceptions

#### “There is no point in my switching to energy-saving lights. The“wasted” energy they put out heats my home, so it’s not wasted.”

This myth is addressed in Chapter 11, p71.

Notes and further reading
-------------------------

page no.

57*Street-lights use about 0.1 kWh per day per person...* There’s
roughly onesodium street-light per 10 people; each light has a power of
100 W, switchedon for 10 hours per day. That’s 0.1 kWh per day per
person.

–*... and traffic lights only 0.005 kWh/d per person*. Britain has 420
000 trafficand pedestrian signal light bulbs, consuming 100 million kWh
of electricityper year. Shared between 60 million people, 100 million
kWh per year is0.005 kWh/d per person.

–*There are fewer signs and illuminated bollards than
street-lights*.[www.highwayelectrical.org.uk]. There are 7.7 million
lighting units (streetlighting, illuminated signs and bollards) in the
UK. Of these, roughly 7 millionare street-lights and 1 million are
illuminated road signs. There are210 000 traffic signals.According to
DUKES 2005, the total power for public lighting is 2095 GWh/y,which is
0.1 kWh/d per person.

–*55%-efficient generator* – source:en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alternator.
Generators in power stations are muchmore efficient at converting
mechanical work to electricity.

  Bulb type             efficiency(lumens/W)
  --------------------- ----------------------
  incandescent          10
  halogen               16-24
  white LED             35
  compact fluorescent   55
  large fluorescent     94
  sodium street light   150

Table 9.5. Lighting efficiencies of commercially-available bulbs. In the
future, white LEDs are expected to deliver 150 lumens per watt.
